SAGITTARIUS WHORL 


An Adventure of the Rampart Worlds 

A Del Rey* Book 

THE BALLANTINE PUBLISHING GROUP 

NEW YORK 


By Published by Ballantine Books: 

 

The Saga of Pliocene Exile 

The Many-Colored Land 

The Golden Tore 

The Nonborn King 

The Adversary 

 

A PLIOCENE COMPANION 

 

Intervention 

The Surveillance 

The Metaconcert 

 

The Galactic Milieu Trilogy 

Jack the Bodiless 

Diamond Mask 

Magnificat / 

 

BLACK TRILLIUM (With Marion Zimmer Bradley and Andre Norton) 

BLOOD TRILLIUM 

SKY TRILLIUM 

 

The Rampart Worlds Trilogy 

Orion Arm 

Perseus Spur 

Sagittarius Whorl 

 

Books published by The Ballantine Publishing Group are available at quantity 
discounts on bulk purchases for premium, educational, fund-raising, and special sales 
use. For details, please call 1-800-733-3000. 


Sale of this book without a front cover may be unauthorized. If this book is coverless, it may have been reported to the 
publisher as "unsold and destroyed" and neither the author nor the publisher may have received payment for it. 

 

A Del Rey® Book 

Published by The Ballantine Publishing Group 

Copyright © 2001 by Starykon Productions, Inc. 

 

All rights reserved under International and Pan-American Copyright Conventions. Published in the United States by 
The Ballantine Publishing Group, a division of Random House, Inc., New York, and simultaneously in Canada by 
Random House of Canada Limited, Toronto. 

 

Del Rey is a registered trademark and the Del Rey colophon is a trademark of Random House, Inc. 

 

www.randomhouse.com/delrey/ 

 

Library of Congress Catalog Card Number: 00-110291 

 

ISBN 0-345-39518-2 

 

Manufactured in the United States of America 

 

First Edition: January 2001 

 

10 987654321 


Chapter 1 

 

Behold a comatose human guy in a dystasis tank, hooked to a psychotronic apparatus 
that plays the same lovely dream over and over and over. He is being genetically 
engineered. 

That much he knows, because he's been in one of the damned vats before—sometime, 
somewhere. The details are a mystery. He drifts in the glass coffin of bubbly oxygen-
charged goo, too stoned by the drugs and REMory dream-programming to react 
rationally during his brief interludes of semiconsciousness. 

The wakeful bits, when he manages to force open his eyes and peer myopically 
through the perfluorocarbon liquid, are fuzzy and surreal and punctuated by stabs of fear 
and helpless anger. During them, the floater recalls one vivid short-term memory 
snippet... 

He sits in a smoke-filled bar in a hollow asteroid in the distant Sagittarius Whorl, and 
the Haluk smiles at him as his consciousness starts to drain away. He remembers his 
despairing certainty, in the final instant before oblivion, that the aliens are probably going 
to subject him to something outrageously weird this time around, having failed to finish 
him off during their previous assaults and batteries. 

He squirms in the dystasis tank, making a futile attempt to swim up, push off the lid, 
and break free. But his limbs and trunk are firmly clamped in an upright frame. Only his 
head, gripped less tightly, is able to move a little. 

He remembers a few more things. 

He can swim. He can cook. He can pilot a starship. He can ride a horse. 

He's a disgrace. He's a lawyer. He's a scuba diver. He's a zillionaire. 

He was a cop. He was a suicidal drunk. He was a political gadfly. He was ... doing 
something that got him in deepest shit. 

When he finishes wrenching his head around uselessly, he sees another transparent-
walled container next to his own. Inside it another body is dimly visible in reddish womb-
light, a companion in dystasis. Straining, he tries to get a better view of the other person, 
but finds it impossible. 

His mouth opens in a silent roar of frustration. With his lungs and the rest of his 
respiratory tract full of liquid, his vocal cords are as impotent as those of an unborn baby. 
The dystasis monitoring equipment detects his frantic muscle contractions and the 
hormonal flood that indicates an agitated mental state. 

Naughty, naughty! His struggles are disrupting the genetic engineering procedure. The 
apparatus programs deeper anesthesia. He plummets back into slumber mode and the 
umpteenth dream replay begins. 

He's always with his wife, whose name he can't recall any more than he can remember 
his own. There is background music—Scott Hamilton playing " 'Round Midnight" on a 
tenor saxophone. The bedroom is very large and of a rustic southwestern ranch style, with 
a high-beamed ceiling and walls of whitewashed adobe, adorned with antique Native 
American weavings and artwork featuring elegantly lewd pastel flower shapes. Double-
glazed sliding doors with parted curtains reveal that it's night and snowing hard outside. 
The sound of the blizzard wind occasionally breaks through cascades of gentle jazz. 
White drifts are piling up outside on the patio. 

He and his wife, young newlyweds, sit side by side on a shearling rug before a blazing 


fire. They're naked, propped happily against each other, sipping Roederer Cristal while 
they watch the dancing flames. Her hair is ash-blond, rippling after being released from 
its braided chignon, and reaches halfway down her back. Her eyes are the color of deep 
ocean waters beyond the reef. She is striking rather than pretty, and her features in repose 
are solemn until he caresses her and makes her smile. 

Time to make love again. 

And again and again, as the psychotronic machine endlessly loops his most exquisite 
memory to facilitate the dystasis procedure. 

The poor happy schmuck in the tank is me. 

Drifting and dreaming. 

—— 

Tap tap tap. 

Someone spoke, an alien voice filtered through a translator device. "How interesting. 
It looks as though he is waking up." 

Someone else: "This is the template individual, Servant of Servants. The original. The 
transformed human subject is recovering in another room, attended by one's technicians. 
We will interview him shortly, just as soon as he is lucid." 

"Let's see if this creature recognizes one." 

Tap tap tap. 

I slowly opened my eyes. The room outside was dimly lit, as always, with most of the 
illumination coming from a bank of alien equipment some distance away. The dark floor 
was intricately veined with a glowing red web that converged on my tank and the one 
beside mine, which was now empty. 

Three Haluk stood looking at me, two males and a female, all wearing translator 
pendants. The tallest of the aliens knocked on the glass wall to get my attention as though 
I were a sulky specimen in an aquarium. 

Tap tap tap. "Wah! Can you hear one, Earth life-form?" 

Of course I could. My ears worked just fine while submerged in the oxygenated glop, 
and he must have known it. 

He pursed his lips in the racial smile-equivalent and twiddled his four-fingered hand in 
mock playfulness. "Do you recall this one's identity?" 

With difficulty, I focused my eyes and concentrated. 

Well, sure. The last time I'd seen him, he was wearing a conservative human-style 
business suit of dark green with faint white pinstripes, tailored to set off his wasp waist 
and accessorized by a scarlet foulard scarf and a diamond stickpin. He was now attired in 
exotic haberdashery appropriate to his high station: bronze-purple robes with glittering 
jeweled trim, an elaborate spiked diadem of platinum, and a matching necklace inset with 
large fossil cabochons. But that ugly blue face was unmistakable, and so were the oddly 
beautiful eyes with their sardonic, hyperintelligent glint. 

The perfluorocarbon bath had rendered me mute, but I snarl-mouthed: You friggin' 
xeno bastard! Damned right I know you. You 're the Servant of the Servants of Luk, the 
head honcho of the Sovereign Haluk Confederation. 

"Bravo," he said dryly. The Haluk aren't telepathic, but my response had evidently 
been clear enough. "Please accept the profound gratitude of this one and of the Council of 
Nine. Thanks to you"—he nodded toward the tenantless second tank—"and to the 
turncoat rascal with whom you shared your vital substance, one has high hopes of an 


accelerated schedule for our Grand Design." 

Suddenly, a surprisingly concrete recollection popped into my skull. The alien leader 
and I had had a nasty confrontation a couple of years ago outside the Assembly Chamber 
of the Commonwealth of Human Worlds in Toronto. At the invitation of Liberal Party 
members sympathetic to Reversionist principles, I had finally testified about... something 
important having to do with the Haluk and their trade treaty with humanity. My speech 
had really pissed off the Servant of Servants and the members of his alien entourage, as 
well as a sizable percentage of the Assembly Delegates. 

But what had I said? And who the hell was I? 

I hadn't a clue. 

The Servant said, "Feeling all right, are you? Archiator Malotuwak assures one that 
you came through the human-to-human genetic exchange in fine fettle. Unfortunately, we 
can't let you out of the dystasis tank just yet. We require a second demiclone." 

Demiclone?... What the hell are you talking about, huckleberry balls? 

"Take one's advice, human. Cooperate willingly when you're called upon later for 
tutorial duties. Extracting the pertinent information by means of psychotronic 
interrogation machines is so uncomfortable. Who knows? If you do well, one might even 
allow you to live. Common laborers are always in demand on our newly colonized 
planets." 

Screw you. With a magnum drill press! 

The second male Haluk spoke up. Short and stocky, he wore a plain mustard-colored 
smock tightly cinched about his slender middle and carried an elaborate Macrodur mag-
slate of the type favored by hotshot human scientists. "He's becoming excited, Servant of 
Servants. This is not a good thing for a dystasis subject. It could delay initiation of the 
second demiclone procedure. One will program a calming medication for him." 

He prodded the slate and a warm woozy feeling began to seep into my body, dulling 
anxiety and slowing my thoughts. I fought the desire to relapse into sleep. 

Demiclone! I should know what that meant. I did know. It was a highly illegal genetic 
engineering procedure. The Haluk had stolen some of my DNA and used it to—to— 

To duplicate me. To morph some other guy into a replica of my precious person. I 
mouthed helpless obscenities. The Servant of Servants had already lost interest in me and 
turned his attention to the Haluk woman standing beside him. 

She was elderly, her skin faded to the color of wellwashed denim, and she wore robes 
of glistening black with a hood that nearly concealed her mane of pale hair. A very 
important-looking polished fossil on a long chain hung about her neck. 

"Is it certain, Archiator Malotuwak," she inquired of Mustard Smock, "that the newly 
created duplicate of this individual retains his own mentality? It would be disastrous to 
the Servant's Grand Design if the demiclone were to be ... contaminated, as it were, by 
the mind-set of this template life-form." 

"That is quite impossible, Council Locutor Ru Kamik. Only the physical aspect of the 
demiclone has been altered." A grimace of distaste. "That other human's mind—such as it 
is—remains his own. One might mention that he was most uncooperative during the 
preliminary procedures, insulting one's assistants and behaving in an arrogant and 
offensive manner." 

The Servant of Servants uttered the grotesque laugh of his species, which sounded like 
a miniature poodle choking to death. "Fortunately for us, the rascal's usefulness to the 


Sovereign Haluk Confederation does not require a congenial disposition." 

"Yes," the Locutor said. "However, his usefulness does require that his true identity 
not be detected. One was somewhat disconcerted to learn that the demiclone is not, after 
all, an essentially perfect replica of this original." 

"True enough," Mustard Smock conceded. "The restricted time frame we were 
allowed precluded optimal DNA transfer. It was necessary to use an abbreviated genetic 
engineering procedure. One made this quite clear to the Servant of Servants and to the 
demiclone subject himself at the outset. Even using the most advanced human equipment 
and techniques, along with broad-spectrum PD32:C2 transferase agents, four weeks in 
the dystasis tank is inadequate for complete chromosomal transformation, given the 
relatively large amount of intron material in the human genome. Introns are more difficult 
to exchange than exons—" 

The Servant of Servants interrupted, addressing the female. "Nobody's going to test 
him, Ru Kamik. They'll have no reason to doubt his identity. He will be carefully 
coached in his role." 

"Nevertheless," said the Locutor firmly, "please explain to this one the circumstances 
under which the demicloned person might be differentiated from the original subject by 
expert investigators of the Commonwealth of Human Worlds." 

The Haluk scientist made the gesture signifying self-abasement. "You'll forgive if one 
gets a bit technical, Great Lady?" 

The Locutor steepled her four-fingered hands in a gesture of condescending assent. 
"Continue. One is by no means completely ignorant of genetics." 

"As you may know, not all of the DNA within body cells acts as a blueprint for life 
processes. Those segments that are active are often called exons. They trigger protein 
production—build the body and keep it in operation. The other DNA segments, those 
with no known function, are called introns. The noncoding introns are intermingled with 
the exons. In the human genome, about ninety percent of the DNA is noncoding. By 
comparison, we Haluk have a smaller percentage of introns, even though our total 
number of exons is close to the human complement." 

"I understand." 

"Because one was commanded to perform this procedure in the shortest possible time, 
one transferred only the exon DNA and about one-tenth of the introns from the donor to 
the recipient. As a consequence, even though the recipient exhibits the physical 
characteristics of the template as perfectly as an identical twin, he nevertheless retains a 
large part of his original intron DNA—the genetic material that seems redundant." 

"And this can be detected by forensic analysis?" 

"Readily, Council Locutor. Most of the genetic variation among human individuals is 
in the introns. Even a rough comparison of the demiclone's DNA with that of the original 
will reveal the fake. If one had only been allowed more time—" 

"It was not practical," the Servant of Servants said dismissively. "And one must 
repeat: the chance of the demiclone undergoing DNA testing during his mission are 
vanishingly small." 

The Locutor spoke in a neutral tone to the Servant of Servants. "Certain members of 
the Council of Nine have very grave misgivings about this stratagem. Using the human 
demiclone, that is, rather than one of our own race." 

"Their doubts are groundless, Ru Kamik," the leader insisted. "The revised Grand 


Design is going to succeed! Almighty Luk will shower his beneficence upon us and 
shatter the spines of the human despots." 

"There is still great danger," she said softly. "And this one is not speaking only of the 
possibility that the turncoat agent's identity may be detected. He himself is a traitor to his 
race and perhaps not entirely sane. One has seen his personality analysis—" 

"Yes, yes, curse it for a wad of odoriferous lepido nose wax! One knows all about that. 
But the scheme he proposed is brilliant. If it succeeds, our grand expansion strategy will 
be accomplished in years, rather than centuries or even millennia." 

"If the scheme succeeds." 

"Wah! Would you have us abandon our great hopes, crawl back to the cluster, 
embrace our fatal allomorphic heritage, and go down to extinction as we exhaust the 
balance of our dwindling resources? Or shall we continue to submit to humanity's tyranny 
here in the Milky Way? ... No! This one has promised the people that all will be freed 
from allomorphy—that our children will live on new, uncrowded worlds. If the Grand 
Design succeeds, this goal will be achieved peacefully. If it fails, we will use force to 
seize the planets we require from the loathsome humans. Curse their arrogance up a 
necrotic copulatory orifice!" 

"Be tranquil, Servant of Servants," Ru Kamik advised. "This one has a duty to 
examine contingencies. Even unpleasant ones. Why would it not be possible to use a 
Haluk demiclone rather than the disguised turncoat to fulfill the Grand Design?" 

"The scheme was conceived by him," the Servant pointed out, simmering down a bit. 
"And he alone is in a unique position to carry off the deception—at least in its initial 
stages. No Haluk demiclone would be able to worm his way into the confidence of the 
Frost family and Rampart Concern quite so readily, or so quickly, as the rogue human 
life-form. Once he is well-established, however, the situation changes. Taking his place, a 
trained Haluk demiclone will be able to maneuver freely, inserting other demiclones into 
positions of power and influence. Humanity will find itself in thrall to us before it realizes 
its peril." 

"But how can we be certain that the turncoat will not fly out of control?" 

"One has made the personal decision that the risk is acceptable. One is aware of the 
individual's limitations, and they have been factored into the operational equation. He 
will be carefully monitored by our other demiclone operatives in the Earth capital city. 
The rogue's personal agenda, vengeful and perfidious though it may be from the point of 
view of his own race, coincides with ours. At least for the time being." 

"As you say, Servant of Servants." She lowered her head so that her eyes were 
momentarily concealed by the hood of her black garment. 

"Don't worry, Ru Kamik," the Servant reassured her. "As soon as possible, the 
wretched human creature will be replaced by one whose loyalty is above suspicion. Our 
own esteemed agent, Ru Balakalak, will carry the mission to its successful completion. 
Meanwhile, the turncoat will have laid the groundwork for the coup. Needless to say, the 
rogue human knows nothing of our intention to eliminate him when his services are no 
longer required." 

She made a noncommittal gesture and turned to address the scientist. "Is it true, then, 
Archiator Malotuwak, that the more lengthy demiclone procedure performed upon Ru 
Balakalak will create a totally undetectable duplicate?" 

Mustard Smock hesitated. "That is the theory, Great Lady, according to the 


reassurances of the late Scientist Milik, who introduced the genetic procedure to us. Of 
course, there exists no validation. So far as we know, no Haluk-human demiclone has 
ever been subjected to DNA analysis by the Commonwealth Criminal Investigation 
Department." 

"Milik!" huffed the Lady in Black. "Can one rely upon her word? She was a flaming 
idealist and an egregious fool, claiming she was ready to die if it would advance the 
cause of interspecific friendship." 

"Milik was a selfless benefactor of our race," said the Servant with dangerous 
emphasis. "A martyr canonized by the Priesthood of Luk." 

"But one that we in the Council of Nine did not fully trust—no more than you did, 
Servant of Servants. In truth, she was another human turncoat of unstable temperament 
and cloudy motivation ... and one who may have secretly meddled with our racial 
heritage, if certain rumors are to be given credence. This one has recently heard that some 
of Milik's work on the eradication of allomorphism has come under scrutiny." 

"Nonsense," retorted the Servant of Servants. "Those rumors are quite devoid of truth. 
It's ridiculous to think that Milik would have tinkered maliciously with the trait-
eradication treatment. Or lied about the flawlessness of the demiclone procedure." "As 
you say," the Locutor murmured. There was a brief silence. Then she asked, "When will 
the second demiclone be ready?" 

"Ru Balakalak is preparing to enter the dystasis tank immediately. As I understand it, 
the unabbreviated procedure takes about twenty-six weeks. Is that correct, Archiator?" 

"Approximately," said Mustard Smock. "In interspecific DNA exchange, there is a 
necessary preliminary operation, a sort of inoculation of the human template individual to 
preclude rejection of exotic DNA by the nonhuman recipient. This is followed by the 
phase during which the actual gene transfer and bodily transformation of the recipient is 
accomplished." 

"Twenty-six weeks is a long time to wait," said the Locutor. 

The Servant said, "Additional time will be required to tutor Ru Balakalak in details of 
the mission once he emerges from dystasis. It is estimated that he will be ready after 
thirty weeks." 

"Thirty!" 

"Meanwhile, one will keep the Council of Nine fully informed concerning operations 
on Earth. Needless to say, one expects that you, Ru Kamik, will be zealous in supporting 
the revised Grand Design." 

She lowered her head again. "As you say, Servant of Servants." 

"Excellent." He turned to the scientist. "And now one believes it is time for this one 
and the Council Locutor to interview the human demiclone." 

"He awaits in the recovery room," Archiator Malotuwak said. "Please follow this one." 

The three Haluk went away and I was left suspended in dopey horror, boggled by the 
technobabble and at a loss to understand the kind of espionage my duplicate was about to 
undertake. Questions swirled in my brain like terrified bait minnows in a bucket. 

Who was the human traitor who now wore my face, who had hatched some ploy that 
was deemed vital to the Haluk Grand Design? 

Whatever the hell that was. 

How could a demiclone of me help put the Commonwealth of Human Worlds in thrall 
to an alien race? 


Dammit—who am I, anyway? 

A disgrace. A former cop. A diver. A zillionaire. Aside from the useless fragments of 
memory, my drugged brain had no answers. 

So after a while I slept again and dreamed of falling snow, the roaring fire, the 
champagne, and my nameless wife's loving arms. Dreamed over and over again, to the 
accompaniment of Scott Hamilton's ancient, peerless saxophone. 

At long last the dreaming stopped. 

—— 

I realized instantly that my situation had changed. Some instinct warned me not to 
open my eyes and not to move. I had sense enough to obey. 

I was out of the tank, breathing ambient air, lying on my back on a firm, slightly 
inclined surface, head cradled in a comfortable pillow. Warm and dry, not hurting—and 
surprisingly alert, even though I still had no notion of my identity or what had happened 
to me. 

Alien voices were speaking and I felt gentle pokes and prods in different parts of my 
anatomy. Two Haluk individuals who called each other Miruviak and Avilik were right 
beside me, performing some sort of physical examination. The suffixes of their names 
indicated that one was male and one female. They were not wearing translators. My 
knowledge of the Haluk language is imperfect and I could understand only part of their 
conversation, which seemed to refer to my condition. I was apparently in satisfactory 
shape, and after a few minutes they covered me to the chin with a soft blanket and moved 
off, still talking. 

I heard one of them say: "The blah blah authority figure is soul-glowing about the 
blah of the dystasis blah blah." 

I understood that to mean that a Haluk VIP, perhaps my old chum the Servant of 
Servants of Luk, was happy about the results of some sort of dystasis procedure. 
"Dystasis" was the same word in English and Halukese because a human had illegally 
introduced it to the aliens. 

The remarks that followed were spoken some distance away, couched in medical 
jargon almost totally incomprehensible to me. I risked cracking open my eyelids. 

1 could see most of the room. It was at least six meters square and looked like an 
accommodation in a superior Haluk hotel catering to humans, situated on one of their 
long-settled colonial planets. With the human-Haluk rapprochement in place in the 
Perseus Spur, I'd once stayed in a similar place. 

Good. You remembered that. Now try to remember something essential—like who you 
are! 

The furnishings, except for scattered pieces of mysterious technical apparatus with 
blinking telltales, were an eclectic mix of alien and Earth designs. On my right, where the 
wall was completely shrouded in opaque draperies, were exotic chairs, a low table, stands 
holding Haluk bioluminescent lamps with quaint shades, and an elaborate human-style 
infomedia credenza. To the left, in an open-plan adjacent room, was a wet bar—no booze 
visible—and a compact kitchen, also human in design. An alcove held a tall case full of 
e-books and slates, plus a collection of anonymous small cabinets constructed of exotic 
materials. The head of my bed was against one wall. Another bed stood on the opposite 
side of the room, flanked by an open bathroom door with a human-type sink visible. A 
second door in that wall was closed. 


The two Haluk medical technicians, wearing human-style pale green hospital scrubs 
and murmuring quiet comments, hovered over the occupant of the other bed, who lay 
motionless while the aliens studied him. I didn't have a very good view of the patient, but 
I could tell that he was a good-sized human male with a fairly powerful build. A small 
console with what looked like medical monitoring equipment stood at his bedside. 

I caught the question: "If a third demiclone is not required, then why not discard the 
blah?" 

The female Haluk said, "This is a very blah demiclone, Miruviak. He must be taught 
blah blah blah and blah before blah his mission. Some of the teaching will be done by 
the human blah who taught blah blah. But blah from the blah over there is also needed. 
Our orders are to keep him alive until the blah decides he is blah blah." 

Not very enlightening. In fact, ominous. 

"This demiclone will wake up soon," said the male medic. "Listen, Avilik: one thinks 
we should blah blah blah. Just in case blah blah blah. Did you bring them with you?" 

"Yes." 

The meditechs had finished their examination of the other patient and replaced his 
blanket. Now they came across the room toward me again. I quickly shut my eyes, 
relaxed, tried to think Zen thoughts, and prayed that my bed wasn't equipped with a built-
in vital signs monitor that would betray the fact that I was rally conscious. Somebody 
drew the covering away from my naked body. They rolled me over and I felt a sharp 
prick in the back of my neck. 

"It is best that we wait to insert the second blah" Avilik decided. "But it is not really 
needed yet. He's still very weak." 

Miruviak grunted something that might have been "That will take care of it," and then 
they rolled me over again and tucked me in. 

"The dystasis turned him a most beautiful color," the female medic remarked, uttering 
the squelched barking sound that represented Haluk laughter. "His blah blah are certainly 
of an imposing size and blah. Later, one hopes to know him better before we must blah 
blah." 

"Disgusting," hissed her colleague, clearly miffed. "You women only blah one thing." 

I heard more alien snickering. Then both of the medical technicians went out of the 
room. I lay still, cold dread seeping into my soul along with a growing comprehension. 
My memory was coming back on-line—parts of it, at any rate— and I didn't like what I 
recalled. 

I'd been in a dystasis tank for at least seven months. The Haluk had made two 
demiclones of me. The first evil triplet had been a human traitor, imperfectly morphed at 
the cell-nucleus level but otherwise my physical duplicate. I had no notion what his 
mission might be, but it boded no good for humanity. The second demiclone was a 
transformed Haluk, destined to replace Agent Number One, who possessed certain talents 
but also had the potential to become uncontrollable. Number Two had been more expertly 
engineered and was perhaps a perfect genetic replica. I presumed that he now occupied 
the bed opposite mine. He was going to be tutored before going out to fulfill his mission, 
and some of the briefings were to come from me, whether I chose to cooperate or not. 

The suite's mishmash of Haluk and human decor made more sense now. It was a 
schoolroom where my shadow and I would live and work together until he had his act 
down pat. 


Interspecific genetic engineering ... there was something peculiar about it. I tried to 
retrieve what I knew from my cerebral database. My sister—what was her name?—had 
once been targeted for demicloning. She was rescued before a duplicate of her could be 
made, but she'd still suffered certain dramatic side effects from the procedure. 

As I would have. 

Turning an alien into a human being was trickier than the usual total-spectrum 
biological refit job and even more illegal under CHW law. It required that the human 
DNA donor—in this case, me—first be modified with an infusion of critical alien genes 
so the demiclone subject wouldn't reject the human material. The preliminary genen 
procedure superficially transformed the DNA donor— 

Rats! 

I lifted my right hand and drew it out from beneath the covers. The skin was very firm 
and tinted a rich sky-blue. There were no fingernails on the four abnormally elongated 
digits. The bones of the pinkie and ring fingers were partially fused now, enclosed in a 
single fleshy envelope. My lower arm, quite hairless, was decorated with a dramatic 
pattern of ridges that sported faintly drawn golden patterns, almost like delicate 
enamelwork. 

I touched my altered face and cursed more eloquently. Weird bulges and a Haluk-style 
flattened nose. Eye sockets of normal human diameter, slightly smaller than Haluk orbits. 
It seemed that I'd kept my human-sized eyeballs, just as my older sister Eve had when the 
Haluk tried to demiclone her. 

Eve! Her name was Eve. And my name was ... 

On the tip of my tongue, which felt strange, as though it were too large for my mouth. 
My teeth seemed peculiar, too. The spaces between them were wider than normal. 

Under the blanket, my hands explored a body that was humanoid but not human. 
Externally, the preliminary genen procedure had turned me into a facsimile of a Haluk, 
complete with a wasp waist that was only about 70 centimeters in circumference. But 
inside my ridged blue skin were human muscles and human guts and human bones, plus a 
discombobulated but swiftly recuperating human brain. I lacked the Haluk elongated 
neck and overall slender build. My alien hands groped lower on their inspection tour until 
they reached my crotch— 

Oh, God! Holy blazing bloody shit! No! Not that! 

It was all I could do not to scream my lungs out. Those rucking xeno fiends ... 

For a few minutes I felt drowned in a black tide of self-loathing and despair. Then I 
remembered that my partially morphed sister Eve—Who hadn't experienced this 
particular indignity—had been restored to her normal human physiology by another 
sojourn in the dystasis tank. At the time, it seemed to be a miracle of modern science. 

I, too, could be made good as new. The ghastly transformation of my genitals could be 
reversed, as could the other changes. Provided that I managed to live long enough, and 
escaped from whatever exotic planet the Haluk had stashed me on. 

Very slowly I sat up, experiencing nausea and a fleeting dizziness. I was weak as a 
new-hatched chick and there was a curious itching sensation at the back of my neck. I 
touched it and felt a tiny lump right at the base of my skull. The damned Haluk meditechs 
had given me an implant, and odds were it had to do with keeping me under control. 

Maybe it was signaling them at this very moment. 

My weird blue feet settled onto the floor—wood parquet laid out in a minuscule 


herringbone pattern, coated with ice-clear "skating rink" glaze a full centimeter in 
thickness. It was a labor-intensive human interior design style, ultra-trendy. Just the sort 
of thing the fad-conscious Haluk were likely to borrow. I judged that I was being held in 
a very upscale alien establishment—certainly nothing resembling the godforsaken 
outpost in the Sagittarius Whorl where I'd gone on the Barky Hunt. Perhaps my captors 
had taken me to the planet Artiuk, their colonial capital in the Milky Way... 

Which was situated in the Perseus Spur sector of the galaxy, fourteen thousand light-
years from Earth. More memories data-dumped. I'd lived in the Spur myself, on a pretty 
little freesoil world called Kedge-Lockaby. Had a house on a tropical island, a yellow 
submarine named Pernio II, and a bunch of rascally friends. Once upon a time I'd been a 
disenfranchised Throwaway, an ex-cop, a happy-go-lucky charterboat skipper who ran a 
sport-diving service for tourists. 

But not lately. 

Something momentous had happened to me. I had returned to Earth and stayed there 
for some years, doing ... 

What? 

Something to do with politics. Something to do with lawyering. Whatever it was had 
keenly interested the Haluk, given my double demicloning and the secrecy attending it. 
Unfortunately, the exact nature of my recent terrestrial activities still eluded me, along 
with my name. 

My name! If I could just remember that, all the rest of it would come back. 

Wrapping the blanket around my dainty middle to hide the disgusting alien sex organs 
that had captivated the female medical technician, I struggled to stand up. Exerted long-
unused muscles and shuffled creakily across the room to the other bed. Stared down at 
the guy who lay there, asleep or unconscious, with tiny alien-type medical sensors stuck 
to his forehead, temples, and neck. 

Recognized him. 

I inhaled sharply, found myself pitching forward in a sudden fit of vertigo, shocked to 
the depths of my being. My blue fingers caught at the bedclothes and I saved myself from 
falling, pushed my trembling body upright and stood there swaying and gasping for 
breath. 

The man was tall and heavy-boned, with a physique less well-developed than it should 
have been—although that flaw could be mitigated through appropriate clothing or even 
judicious doses of steroids. The face would need work, too. The skin was pasty from his 
long sojourn in the tank, and the features were too fresh and regular. He lacked a certain 
distinctive scar at the top of his left cheekbone. His nose had never been broken in a Big 
Beach brawl and coaxed back into shape by a defrocked Throwaway plastic surgeon 
suffering a cosmic-class hangover from Danaean rotgut. His hair was pretty authentic, the 
color of bread crust, springing from his forehead in a distinctive widow's peak. It was a 
little too long, but a barber would fix that. When his eyes opened, I was positive they'd be 
cold green with an inner ring of amber. 

I knew him, all right. 

He was me. 

My demiclone, the alien imposter who was going to take my place—or rather the 
place of Demiclone Number One, already secretly machinating. We would help conquer 
humanity on behalf of the Haluk race. 


My name was Asahel Ethan Frost. Called Asa by my family, Helly by my friends, and 
Helmut Icicle by assorted crooks, ne'er-do-wells, and disenfranchised wretches of the 
Perseus Spur. My father was Simon Frost, the founder of Rampart Interstellar 
Corporation, which had now become Rampart Amalgamated Concern. My mother was 
the late Katje Vanderpost, gentle philanthropist, whose murder I had yet to avenge. Her 
gift had made me a zillionaire. My siblings were Eve, Bethany, and the matricidal Daniel. 
My wife—my former wife, for we had been divorced for nearly eight years—was Joanna 
DeVet, Morehouse Professor of Political Science at Commonwealth University, Toronto 
Campus. 

I remembered it all, including details of my anti-Haluk political activities, my legal 
triumph for Rampart Concern, and the ill-advised escapade in the Sagittarius Whorl that 
had brought me to this pretty pass. 

So, what are you going to do about it, you sorry Halukoid piece of shit? 

The back of my neck tingled as a wave of fury washed over me, and I jumped as if I'd 
been goosed. Whatever I did, I knew I'd better do it mighty damned fast. 

Fake Helly looked so peaceful, lying there. For an instant I wondered what kind of 
sweet alien dream they'd programmed for him while he was in dystasis. Then I twitched 
the pillow out from under his head, pressed it over his face, and held it down while he 
writhed feebly under me and uttered muffled cries. 

The medical monitor standing beside the bed let out a shriek of alarm. Simultaneously, 
the gizmo implanted in my neck began to administer a series of increasingly severe 
shocks at intervals of about five seconds. If they were intended to deter me from 
homicidal rage and other adrenaline-driven misdeeds, someone had badly miscalculated 
the human pain threshold. 

I flung myself on top of my double, using my weight to pin his flailing arms. Neither 
of us was up to snuff physically, but I still had my superior human musculature and knew 
how to use it. The regular shocks from my neck implant were now so strong that I was 
moaning in agony. 

I kept on doing what I had to do. 

His struggles weakened and finally stopped. I held the pillow down hard for another 
minute or so, then pulled it away. His lips were cyanotic, smeared with blood from his 
bitten tongue. The wide-open eyes had tiny points of red dotting the whites, and the 
pupils were wide and black. I felt for a pulse in his throat and found nothing. The monitor 
continued its shrill distress signal. 

He was clinically dead, but they'd be able to revive him. Unless ... 

The pain from the neck shocks was becoming unbearable, and I knew I'd pass out 
unless I could do something about it. I staggered across the room toward the small 
kitchen, scratching impotently at my nape with Halukoid fingers lacking nails. Tore open 
drawer after drawer, finally found one with small cooking utensils. What to use? I 
couldn't find any knives, which figured. 

That! If only it's sharp enough ... 

I grabbed it, thrust it awkwardly against the tiny lump, and gouged with all my 
strength. 

One last bellow emptied my lungs. Then pain—but of a new sort, related to torn flesh. 
I dropped the melon bailer with its malignant contents on the floor, grabbed up a dish 
towel and pressed it against the streaming wound. My blood was very red, very human. 


As his would be, no longer circulating. But the Haluk medics would be able to do 
something about that unless I made it impossible. 

I dived back into the drawer of kitchen utensils and rummaged frantically, cursing the 
absence of sharply pointed implements until I realized that any damage I might inflict 
with them would be easily repairable. I had to destroy Fake Helly, and do it within 
minutes. 

A thought. 

The wet bar. Did it have what I needed? 

Yes! My blue hand closed over the drink-mixing wand. I stumbled back to the 
motionless body. Eyes wide open in death, he didn't feel a thing as I positioned the 
implement and bore down with gruesome effect. To my surprise, the eyeball didn't 
rupture but simply slid aside. The thin wall of bone behind it crunched and I was through 
to the brain. 

And activated the mixer's control to the highest setting: STIFF WHIP. Inadvertent 
morbid humor there. The efficient little machine didn't even make a mess. 

Try to repair that in your dystasis tank, huckleberry balls! 

I made the mistake of withdrawing the wand, only to drop the thing on the floor as my 
stomach gave a terrific heave and thin bile flooded my throat. Fortunately, my guts were 
almost empty because of the dystasis, but it still took me a few minutes to recover. After 
all, I'd just done a cerebral puree job on myself... 

Enough. Think escape. 

I was surprised that no Haluk had responded yet to the medical alarm or to the signal 
that had set off my neck-shocker. It was time for me to get moving. Steal a set of clothes, 
flee into the alien landscape of Artiuk, or whatever planet I was on. 

Better check the weather outside. I'd been on Artiuk only once. The climate was torrid 
and subject to heavy rains. 

I ran to the wall of draperies, hoping they covered windows, pulled aside the hanging 
fabric and uttered a disbelieving expletive. 

Outside the glass was an immense city, viewed from a height. It was night. Soaring 
towers rose on either hand as far as I could see, their shining colored forms enmeshed in 
webs of skyways and high roads with streams of cars zipping along them. Aircraft moved 
in traffic-controlled pathways like regimented fireflies through a sky tinted bright gold. It 
had to be snowing hard outside the force-field umbrella. 

That wasn't Artiuk out there, or any other Haluk colony. It was Earth. And the city 
was one I knew intimately: Toronto, capital of the Commonwealth of Human Worlds. 

Still holding the blood-soaked towel to my neck, I began to laugh like a maniac. I only 
stopped when the outer door of the room crashed open and the two medical technicians 
rushed inside, followed by a pair of uniformed Haluk guards armed with Ivanov stun-
pistols. 


Chapter 2 

 

Last April, when I still wore the outward appearance of a human being, I said goodbye 
to my legal staffers and got the hell out of town. While the judges considered their 
verdict, I intended to rest up at my family's Sky Ranch in Arizona and consider my 
future—especially in regards to the Barky Hunt. 

For the first couple of days I did nothing but sleep. Then I worked out in the ranch's 
well-equipped gym, swam laps in the indoor pool—it still being a trifle brisk outdoors in 
the high country—read some vintage Louis L'Amour and John D. MacDonald, and 
finished off each evening riding out to watch the sun go down in a different part of the 
sprawling Frost family spread. 

My favorite mount was a horse named Billy, a huge sweet-natured gelding of the type 
southwesterners call a flea-bitten gray. That's not to mean he's infested or broken down; 
the odd term describes a variety of pale horse speckled all over with tiny spots of blue 
and red hair. Billy was strong and smart, he obeyed orders, and he didn't spook when an 
unexpected quail or jackrabbit exploded out of the chaparral right under his nose. In 
Arizona you can't hardly ask more of a horse than that. 

On the tenth day of my holiday, Billy and I plodded easily uphill in the lengthening 
shadows while thin clouds turned from white to pink beyond the Tonto Basin. Spring in 
the Sierra Ancha is unobtrusively lovely. Golden yuccas, buckbrush, and manzanitas 
were blooming, tiny little hummingbirds with amethyst throats poked busily around the 
flowers for a final snack before nightfall, and the ethereal song of the hermit thrush 
echoed among the mesas and canyons. 

It was a great place for unwinding, as different from the capital of the Commonwealth 
of Human Worlds as it could possibly be. 

I'd left Toronto in a seriously fatigued state. Only my close-mouthed executive 
assistant, Jane Nelligan, knew where I was going, and she was under orders to reveal my 
whereabouts to no one. I told the ranch staff to ignore my presence, and they did—except 
for the horse wrangler who cared for Billy, and Rosalia the cook, who supplied me with 
three gourmet squares a day and kept the chitchat to a minimum. 

I'd earned some incommunicado time. After more than two years of cosmic-class 
courtroom warfare, Rampart Concern's civil suit against Galapharma was finally ready 
for adjudication. Now it was up to three justices of the Commonwealth Tribunal to 
produce a verdict in what the media had deemed the corporate trial of the century, David 
vs. Goliath. 

Little Rampart, youngest and smallest of the Hundred Concerns, was suing the pants 
off Galapharma, one of the oldest and largest. We alleged conspiracy to devalue for the 
purpose of hostile acquisition, sabotage, industrial espionage, theft and subsequent 
malicious use of data, subornation of Rampart employees, and a lengthy laundry list of 
other major torts. Pursuant to Statute 129 of the Interstellar Commerce Code, Rampart 
demanded as redress the maximum damages set by law—namely, all assets tangible and 
intangible of Galapharma Amalgamated Concern, including their 5,345 booming 
planetary colonies. 

If we won, Gala belonged to us. If we lost, the best we could hope for was that 
Commonwealth prosecutors could make an assortment of criminal charges against the big 
Concern stick. The odds of that happening were slim. Important evidence had vanished, 


and crucial witnesses were dead or had disappeared. The one man who might have 
fingered Galapharma for its crimes was also the principal material . witness in Rampart's 
civil suit; and Oliver Schneider had struck an immunity deal that precluded any 
obligation to give testimony under the criminal statutes. 

If Gala won, its lawyers would waste no time slapping Rampart with a colossal civil 
countersuit, stunting the growth and profitability of its small rival for years to come—if 
not destroying it outright. 

As Rampart's interim Chief Legal Officer, I had been in total charge of orchestrating 
our case, always working behind the scenes. Not that I'd asked for the job! I'd fought like 
a wildcat to avoid it. But my father, Simon Frost, and my big sister Eve—Rampart's 
Chairman of the Board and CEO, respectively—had leaned on me, inviting my scrutiny 
of certain inescapable facts. 

My older brother, Daniel, the former Rampart corporate counsel and secretary, could 
hardly head up the litigation. An unindicted Galapharma coconspirator, Dan was kept 
doped to the eyeballs and under heavy guard in a fishing lodge up in the Ontario North 
Woods, where he stubbornly professed his complete innocence. 

None of the subordinate officers in Rampart's legal department were deemed capable 
of directing a complex, unprecedented civil action such as this one. To bring in an outside 
team of litigators was not an option, either. There were aspects of the case that didn't bear 
close scrutiny: for instance, the strong probability that Dan had engineered our mother's 
death, acting under orders from Galapharma. 

And there was also the secret Haluk connection, political dynamite now that the blue 
buggers were legitimate trading partners of the Commonwealth ... 

Simon and Eve maintained that only one candidate for Rampart legal battlemaster had 
it all—being a major stakeholder in the Concern, a trusted member of the family, and a 
highly trained lawyer (although nonpracticing) familiar with every aspect of the case. 

Yours truly, Asahel Frost. 

Trying to wriggle out of the fast-closing trap, I reminded them that I was not a 
member of the Commonwealth bar and could not be quickly qualified by any string-
pulling finagle of theirs. Even though my citizenship had been restored through a 
technicality, the felonies I'd been framed for were still on my record. In the eyes of the 
law I was still a convict on probation. In the eyes of the media I was a misfit—a 
charismatic one, though!—the black sheep of a distinguished family, a notorious 
loudmouth with eccentric political leanings. There was no way I could represent Rampart 
before the Judicial Tribunal in person. 

No problem, said Simon and Eve. What they needed was not Rumpole of the Bailey or 
Perry Mason, but rather my expertise in rousting corporate outlaws, gained during my 
aborted career as an enforcement officer with the Interstellar Commerce Secretariat. A 
staff of talented associates would handle the actual pleading before the court. If 
necessary, the underlings could be coached by me every step of the way through cerebral 
chips. 

I shifted into whine mode. Hadn't I already risked my life half a dozen times to obtain 
crucial evidence supporting Rampart's case against Galapharma? Hadn't I rescued Eve 
from kidnappers that would have demicloned her and seized control of Rampart? Hadn't I 
saved Simon himself from a fate worse than death in the infamous prison known as 
Coventry Blue? Wasn't that fucking good enough? I didn't want to spend years on a 


convoluted legal case. I had other plans for my life. 

"Like what?" my father had bellowed. "Stirring up a fresh hornet's nest with the 
damned Reversionist Party? Or maybe reverting to beach bum status on that boondock 
South Seas planet back in the Perseus Spur?" 

I invited him to go to hell. He suggested that I perform a sexual act on myself. The 
discussion trended downhill from there. 

Simon and I have a long history of horn-locking, beginning from the time fifteen years 
ago when I refused on principle to join the family starcorp. Now he castigated my 
selfishness and lack of filial loyalty. He dredged up my fancy-pants doctorate from 
Harvard Law School that I'd more or less tricked him into paying for. 

Finally, in a fit of bogus cowhand vituperation, the old coot allowed as how if'n I let 
Rampart—i.e., him—down, I was nothing but a chicken-livered pecker-ass bastard with a 
yellow streak so wide it lapped plumb around to my brisket bone. 

I was about to tell Simon to stuff his John Wayne act where the sun doesn't shine 
when my sister Eve ordered us both to shut up. Then she made a single point that stabbed 
me to the heart and put an abrupt end to my weaseling. 

"Asa, have you forgotten that our mother's murder was instigated by Galapharma's 
chairman? Dan only acted as Alistair Drummond's cat's-paw. We probably couldn't prove 
Drummond's complicity in the crime even if we found he was still alive, but his Concern 
is still a legitimate target. Do you want some kind of justice for Mom, or don't you?" 

Aw, shit... Damned right I did. 

So I caved in. 

And worked my tail off for two solid years. When the case went to the judges at long 
last, I figured we had an excellent chance of winning. 

—— 

I guided my horse Billy along Bear Head Canyon trail, approaching the 
undistinguished peak we call Copper Mountain. At 2,071 meters, it's the tallest of a 
scrub-covered range near the southern boundary of the Sky Ranch. 

When we were kids, my brother and sisters and I were forbidden to go up Copper 
because of a dangerous abandoned gold mine on its eastern slope. So of course we made 
that our favorite secret spot. It was our hideout when we played outlaw, and the den of 
xeno monsters when we pretended to be Zone Patrol troopers. Just inside the mine 
entrance, I'd once killed a blacktail rattlesnake that had menaced my little sister, Bethany. 
Another time, my brother, Dan, risked his neck exploring a tumbledown side tunnel and 
found a glittering chunk of mineral that he declared was real gold. Dan was always the 
lucky one—until he grew up and succumbed to the temptations of a lunatic Scotsman. 

Who might or might not be buried deep inside that very gold mine. 

Three years ago, in a last ditch effort to salvage his faltering conspiracy, Alistair 
Drummond had narrowly missed killing my family and the rest of the Rampart Board of 
Directors by blowing up the main house of the Sky Ranch. He tried to escape by driving 
up Copper Mountain in a Range Rover, and when I came after him, he almost managed to 
nail me before taking refuge in the abandoned mine. I used a Harvey blaster to bring 
down a landslide on top of him. 

Trouble was, we'd never found Drummond's body in the rubble-filled mine shaft. 

The horse carried me toward the gap that separates Copper Mountain from Bear Head 
Peak to the west. I reined in before the going got too rough, pulled a set of power oculars 


out of my saddlebag, and swept them over the brush-covered flanks of Copper. Of course 
I found nothing unusual; even the site of the great slide and the subsequent excavation 
were on the opposite side of the mountain. 

"What do you think, Billy? Did the damned mine have another way out? Us kids never 
found one, and we explored the hell out of that old hole in the ground." 

The horse kept his opinion to himself. 

I sighed and put the ocs away. To hell with Alistair Drummond. To hell with 
everything connected to Galapharma and the trial. This was my time to kick back and 
drift. I turned the mount around so I could concentrate my attention on the sunset beyond 
Bear Head. The western sky was slashed with crimson and purple streaks of cirrus cloud. 
The color faded slowly as I sat in my saddle, deliberately emptying my mind. Billy did a 
different sort of emptying, then nipped at some fresh greenery. A bat chased a flying bug 
through the chaparral. The high country was very quiet. 

After a while the horse left off browsing, nickered softly, and cocked his ears. He was 
listening to something upslope. I heard it, too—an irregular metallic tink-tink tinkety-tink 
that sounded almost like a spoon handle rattling faintly in a thick coffee mug: completely 
unnatural. A minute later a spherical black thing about the size of a golf ball came 
creeping down the steep rocky trail on thin jointed legs. Its two rat-eyes glowed in the 
dusk and its sensors swiveled busily. 

A SPYder. It tippy-toed to within four meters of my fascinated horse and came to a 
halt. 

"Good evening, Citizen Asahel Frost," it said. "I am not here to threaten or harm you. 
Please confirm this by drawing your own weapon." 

The robot's voice was a human transmission. The controller had probably been 
tracking me by satellite from the moment I left the house. The Sky Ranch doesn't bother 
with ground-based optical dissimulator technology, although it has a full arsenal of 
intruder deterrents and multiphase alarm sensors. 

"You're trespassing," I said, obediently pulling a Finnila Bodyguard photon carbine 
from its gun boot on the saddle. The weapon switched itself on automatically and 
scanned the thing that confronted me. 

Device is unarmed, my gun reported. I activated the targeter anyhow. 

"I repeat!" said the SPYder. "I am not here to threaten or harm you." 

"Goody. But you weren't invited, either. Give me one reason why I shouldn't fry your 
tiny Tootsie Roll." 

"That would be illegal," the machine said smugly, "since you've passed nineteen 
meters beyond the boundary of the Sky Ranch into public lands." 

"Maybe I have," I conceded, lowering the gun. The perimeter in this remote and 
rugged area was unfenced and unmarked, the scanner units that guarded it were hard to 
spot, and I'd deactivated the saddle alarm days ago so it wouldn't bug me when I strayed 
off the spread. "Who are you and why are you stalking me?" 

"Jordan Sensenbrenner of the Wall Street Journal here! Would you care to comment 
on today's Rampart-Galapharma verdict by the Commonwealth Judiciary Tribunal?" 

My jaw dropped. "A decision already? My God—it's only been ten days! How did the 
judges rule?" 

"You mean you haven't heard about it?" 

"I've been totally incommunicado. Getting some much-needed peace and quiet. You 


want to tell me what happened?" 

The SPYder's voice went cagey. "Perhaps you don't know about Simon Frost's 
sensational announcement, either. The Journal would definitely like to hear your reaction 
to that." 

"My saddle has a datalink and display. Why don't you pass along what you've got. 
When did the verdict come down?" 

"Mmm ... Maybe we should talk quid pro quo. You give me a decent statement for 
attribution, I'll have our comsat download the Journal articles we'll be posting later 
tonight on our site. They contain full details of the court decision given an hour ago, 
along with your father's announcement. Deal?" 

Damn webcrawlers had more nerve than a sperm whale's wisdom tooth. This one was 
starting to annoy me, so I lifted the Finnila and blasted a rock just a mite to the left of it. 

The SPYder skittered sideways and instantly deployed a miniature force-field. "You 
can't do that! I claim media privilege! I'm just trying to do my job!" 

"I can do whatever I please—provided I don't give a damn about the consequences. 
You're trying to pressure me, Jordan Sensenbrenner. There are people who'd tell you 
that's not a very smart thing to do." 

"I assure you I didn't mean—" 

"That puny shield your bot is wearing can stop a laser bolt but not a gross physical 
assault. Suppose I kick your expensive little toy down a coyote hole and roll a rock on 
top? Or maybe stomp it till it's crippled and smother it in some of the horse apples Billy 
just dropped? Would that make your editor happy?" 

The SPYder dropped its defensive shield. It was groveling time. "Citizen Frost, 
perhaps this interview got off on the wrong foot—" 

"It's not an interview yet, only a close encounter of the Wild West kind ... However, I 
admit I'm anxious to hear the big news before it hits the PlaNet. I suppose I could call the 
folks down at the ranch and ask them to patch me into Rampart Tower in Toronto, but it 
might take a few minutes to organize the relay. So I'd be much obliged if you'd just pass 
on the information out of the goodness of your heart, no strings attached. Don't you think 
your boss at the Journal would consider that a wise move?" 

"Oh, very well," the SPYder grumped. It told me the satellite's access code. 

I uncovered the unit on the saddle pommel, activated the antenna and expanded the 
viewscreen, entered the data and tapped SAT DOWNLOAD. A moment later I was reading 
the Journal copy quoting the judges' unanimous decision. 

Galapharma AC was found guilty on all charges, with no appeal to be entertained by 
the Tribunal. 

Compensatory and punitive damages owed by Gala to Rampart were still to be 
assessed, but the consensus among legal scholars was that the greatest pharmaceutical 
and genetic technology company in the galaxy was fucked to a finality. The Tribunal 
would probably order Galapharma to be turned over lock, stock, and barrel to Rampart, 
instantly lofting my family's firm into the exalted company of the Big Seven. 

Some observers attributed Rampart's victory to the brilliant litigation strategy of its 
unofficial CLO, the dashing and unconventional Asahel Frost. He was also rumored to 
have personally apprehended the principal material witness for the prosecution, using 
highly unorthodox methods. 

I finished reading and eyed the SPYder. "Very nice, Jordan. You may quote me as 


being personally gratified by the verdict, which affirms my faith in the CHW judiciary 
system. All corporate entities, most especially those of high status whose actions 
influence the very integrity of the Commonwealth, must conform scrupulously to the 
dictates of the law." 

"Have you yourself always done so, Citizen Frost?" Sensenbrenner inquired blandly. 
"There's been speculation that the witness Oliver Schneider was—" 

"Next question." 

"Perhaps you ought to read your father's statement first." 

I skipped through the sidebar articles and trial commentary, scanning for Simon's 
name. I found the piece, read the headline, and uttered a shocked expletive. 

. 

RAMPART CHAIRMAN, JUBILANT OVER GALAPHARMA VERDICT, DECLARES HE WILL 
STEP DOWN IN FAVOR OF MAVERICK SON 

. 

by Jordan Sensenbrenner 

. 

Toronto, Earth, 19 April 2236—In the wake of today's historic verdict 
favoring Rampart Concern, its Chairman of the Board, Simon Frost, 88, 
declared: "This is the happiest moment in my life." After congratulating 
his legal team on its success, he made a sensational announcement. 

"During the past few years," Frost said, "Rampart has not only repulsed a 
criminal hostile takeover attempt but also managed to thrive and expand. 
We've risen from a closely held Interstellar Corporation to an 
Amalgamated Concern, thanks largely to the efforts of a brilliant group of 
top executives headed by my daughter Eve Frost, Rampart's CEO. I'm 
proud to have played a role in this expansion, just as I'm proud to be a 
cofounder of Rampart. 

"Back in 2183, when my brother Ethan and our partner Dirk Vanderpost 
and I went out to the Perseus Spur to seek our fortunes, we never dreamed 
that a day like this would come. It was enough that our little Starcorp 
could meet its payroll and keep the Haluk and Qastt pirates from stealing 
our cargoes. 

"Well, times change. Today both of those races are CHW trading partners. 
The Spur boasts 219 prosperous Rampart Worlds, with more being opened 
to human colonization and economic development every month. I'm 
tickled pink that I lived to see that happen. 

"Now that Rampart has weathered its greatest crisis and come out on top, 
I've decided that it's time for me to step down from active corporate 
leadership and make way for younger blood. I intend to retire as Chairman 
of the Board. And I hereby nominate my son Asahel Frost to take my 
place. Without him, Rampart would have succumbed to Galapharma's 
hostile takeover ploy. Without him, we would never have won our civil 
judgment against Gala. 

"I haven't consulted Asa yet, so this is going to be a bit of a surprise to 
him. But I'm confident that he'll accept the chairmanship, just as I'm 
confident that Rampart Concern will continue to prosper in the years to 
come." 


—— 

Having delivered the antimatter warhead, the article continued with a summary of my 
roller-coaster career. Sensenbrenner glossed over my stint as a Divisional Chief Inspector 
in the ICS, where I had been one of the valiant, overworked band charged with ferreting 
out wrongdoing among the Big Businesses that effectively control the Commonwealth of 
Human Worlds. In contrast, the details of my conviction, my dismissal from the 
enforcement arm of the Commerce Secretariat, and my disenfranchisement were 
presented in lip-smacking detail. He had even interviewed a few of my more vengeful 
acquaintances on the planet Kedge-Lockaby, who painted a revolting and accurate picture 
of me in my days as a drunken Throwaway. 

My rescue of Eve from her kidnappers and my alleged apprehension of Oliver 
Schneider in an illicit raid on the Qastt planet Dagasatt were described more cautiously to 
skirt the libel laws. (I was a citizen again by then.) The article was silent on my role in 
the presumed demise of Alistair Drummond. 

Katje Vanderpost's mind-boggling gift to me of her Rampart quarterstake had lifted 
me into the ranks of the political movers and shakers. The writer seemed to have no idea 
why I'd dedicated almost all of the obscenely large income from my mother's stake to 
projects of the underdog Reversionist Party. (I'd made a promise to carry on her own 
sponsorship, since party principles coincided with youthful ideals I had mothballed while 
serving in the ICS.) Jordan did concede that I'd made a notable splash for ten entertaining 
months, attacking the Commonwealth Assembly's craven symbiosis with Big Business, 
until the Galapharma trial forced me to put my political life on hold. 

The article ended with speculation on what course I'd choose to follow next. 

If they only knew ... 

"I can't answer that question yet," I told Sensenbrenner. "I'm going to have to think 
long and hard about it. But you can quote me on this: I will do nothing that will 
contravene the Reversionist Guiding Principles, nor do I intend to completely abandon 
politics." I couldn't resist adding, "Perhaps it's possible that under my leadership, 
Rampart Concern could modify its operations to reflect the philosophy of Reversionism." 

Wow—heresy! The reporter couldn't keep the expectation of a major scoop out of his 
voice. 

"But... most Reversionists favor drastically limiting the political influence of the 
Hundred Concerns—in effect, destroying the galactic economic structure!" 

I laughed. "I admit that some party zealots might feel that way. My own views on the 
subject are not nearly so radical. Nevertheless, for nearly two centuries Big Business has 
exploited the stars with only minimal checks and balances by the Commonwealth. I want 
the Hundred Concerns made more accountable to the Assembly. To the elected 
representatives of humanity at large. I'd like to see laissez-faire interstellar economics 
reined in or even abolished, along with the laws that enable human business interests to 
do just about anything they please if it means increased profits for their stakeholders. I 
also favor just treatment of nonstargoing Indigenous Sapient races whose worlds are 
colonized and developed by humanity. And closer regulation of trade with interstellar 
alien civilizations that might not be fully committed to ... interspecies goodwill." 

"Are you speaking about the Kalleyni, the Joru, the Y'tata, and the Qastt, Citizen 
Frost? Or about the Haluk?" 

"No further comment at this time." 


"As chairman of Rampart, do you really believe you could implement your 
Reversionist ideals?" 

"If I took the position, I could try. My late uncle, Ethan Frost, who headed Rampart in 
the beginning, was one of the first galactic entrepreneurs to give Insap workers human-
equivalent wages and decent working conditions. I'm convinced his policy was the 
principal reason Rampart prospered in the Perseus Spur, while Galapharma and the other 
oppressive outfits who tried to make a go of it failed and had to withdraw." 

"But the majority of economists and financial authorities don't believe that approach 
would be practical in the longer-settled Orion Arm worlds, much less in the Sagittarius 
Whorl—" 

I flapped a dismissive hand at the SPYder. "Stop. I won't argue the point with you 
now. I told you that I don't know yet what I'm going to do with my life. Maybe I'll accept 
the Rampart chairmanship. Maybe I'll go back to being gadfly-in-chief for the 
Reversionists. Maybe I'll do something completely different. Right about now I feel like 
flying away to some quiet little planet where nobody knows my name. The Galapharma 
trial left me worn down to a nubbin. Simon's proposal couldn't have come at a worse 
time. I need to re-tune my perspective before I commit myself." 

"How long before you—" 

"That's enough," I said. "End of interview." I turned Billy away and started back down 
the trail. The high clouds had lost their color and the first stars were popping out in the 
east. 

The SPYder came scuttling after me. "Citizen Frost! Just a few more words! When do 
you expect to return to Toronto? Would you grant the Journal an in-depth interview 
concerning your political ambitions? Or discuss the direction Rampart Concern might 
take under your—" 

Casually, I shifted in the saddle, raised the carbine and fired from the hip, drilling the 
little machine through one of its glowing eyes. It exploded in a brief puff of smoke and 
plasma. Billy didn't even flinch. 

Then I started back to the ranch house. I figured it wouldn't be long before my father 
showed up. 

—— 

I half expected Eve to accompany Simon, the better to coerce me. But when I arrived 
an hour or so later I found him alone in the big living room of the fully restored main 
house, staring into a blaze of pinon logs in the big fireplace and sipping his usual bourbon 
and branch water. A magslate, the logo of the Wall Street Journal shining on its viewer, 
lay on the polished petrified-wood coffee table behind him. The late edition had been 
posted. I presumed that my interview with Sensenbrenner was in it. 

Looking glum, Simon nodded but didn't speak as I came through the open French 
doors, still covered with trail dust. 

I took off my stained old Stetson hat and Pendleton blanket jacket and went to the 
sideboard where the drinks were. Passing by the Maker's Mark Limited Edition, Hirsch 
Pot Still, and other upmarket tarantula juice that my father fancied, I helped myself to my 
favorite blue-collar tipple: Jack Daniel's, straight up. A single shot sufficed to 
demonstrate that I hadn't reverted to the lush life. After tossing it down I drew a tall draft 
beer from the keg of Dortmunder tucked in a compartment of the sideboard, sat on one of 
the leather couches in front of the hearth, and began to haul my boots off. 


Simon stood watching me out of hooded green eyes. His hair was light brown with a 
prominent widow's peak, just like mine. I'd inherited his thin-bridged nose, too, and the 
wide mouth with downturned corners that was capable of blooming in a megawatt smile. 
He'd taken full advantage of modern medical science and genengineering to stave off 
time's ravages, and usually gave an impression of indomitable physical vigor. 

But not today. 

He was dressed in one of his semiformal riverboat gambler suits rather than the 
tailored ranchman outfits he usually sported, perhaps signaling the special character of 
the occasion. He seemed tired and wary, and the black broadcloth of his suit emphasized 
his abnormally wan aspect. I recalled being taken aback when the Journal article gave his 
age. People—including me—tended to forget how old Simon Frost really was. 

"They were having a victory bash at Rampart Tower when I left," he said to me at last. 
His voice was just a bit too loud. 

"Everybody was toasting you—even the people who pissed and moaned the loudest 
when Evie and I appointed you acting legal chief and gave you free rein. The whole gang 
agreed we never would have won a nonappellate verdict without your leadership. I 
suppose congratulations are in order." 

I thought: Well, thanks all to hell, Pop! But I said nothing. 

He continued. "You were the best one for the job and you did it. 'Muff said. And now 
there's another job needs doing ..." He let the words trail off, as if daring me to turn him 
down flat. 

Oh, no you don't, you old buzzard. This time we play by Helly's rules. 

I finally got rid of the boots, put my feet up on the low table, took a deep swallow of 
beer, and slid forward on the cushions so my rump was almost level with my shoulders. 
"I'm surprised Evie didn't come with you." 

"The quick verdict caught her by surprise. She's four days out, en route to the Spur, 
and didn't want to backtrack. There's some sort of conkbuster situation connected to the 
Cravat facility expansion. Zed couldn't seem to get a handle on it so she decided to take 
care of the matter personally. She'll return to Toronto as soon as the flap is resolved and 
help you and the other legal eagles work out the petitions for redress." 

"Sam Yamamoto and Marcie Kirov are perfectly capable of supervising that—along 
with all the other post-trial stuff," I told him. "I got you your damned verdict. Don't 
expect me to shovel up after the circus parade." 

A long silence, broken only by the faint cries of nighthawks. The doors were still open 
to the patio, and I could smell the perfume of the hundred-year-old wisteria growing on 
the cenador next to the barbecue pit. Miraculously, the explosion that destroyed the main 
house had spared the rustic dining shelter and the adjacent gardens, as well as most of the 
trees and ranch outbuildings. 

I said, "How'd you know where I was?" 

"A pushy Wall Street Journal reporter told me. He found you with a Big Eye satellite 
three days ago. Figured you might give him an interview on your trial strategy once the 
verdict was in. Seems you didn't try very hard to keep undercover once you got out here. 
Right after I issued my statement at the media conference, this Journal joker was all over 
me wanting an exclusive follow-up. Said he intended to contact you here at the Sky 
Ranch, too. I told him lotsa luck getting through the security umbrella. But I reckon he 
did." 


"A SPYder robot tracked me down as I was riding outside the perimeter this evening. I 
gave a few quotable remarks before I zapped the bot to smithereens with my Finnila. It 
was giving me attitude." 

"Goddammit, Asa! What's the sense antagonizing the legitimate media? It's not like 
the webster was from a tabloid." 

"The real question," I said, pushing myself upright and looking him dead in the eye, 
"is why the hell you chose to offer me the Rampart chairmanship via a media release 
instead of putting it to me privately, in person. Do you really think it's an offer I can't 
refuse?" 

"More like a trial balloon," said the crafty old bastard, "to see how the Hundred 
Concerns might react to the idea. Especially Adam Stanislawski and his venture-credit 
hardheads at Macrodur. Rampart will need them more than ever after the Gala 
consolidation. I wanted to float the idea of you as my replacement while your reputation 
is still sky-high and shiny." 

"As opposed to it taking a dive into the cesspool if I get involved in politics again? ... 
And what about my standing felony convictions? Ollie Schneider's ready to make a 
deposition about the trumped-up charges, but it'll take forever for a reversal to work 
through the courts." 

"That's a dead issue, boy. Even if it can't be proved that you were framed, anyone with 
half a brain figures Gala dry-gulched you so's you wouldn't be able to use your position 
in the ICS to stymie the takeover. As for your flaming lefty politics, if you just soft-pedal 
things a little—" 

I uncoiled and climbed up from the couch, invading his private space until we were 
nearly nose-to-nose in front of the fireplace. "Let me tell you something, Simon," I said 
quietly. "My Reverse principles are still very much alive. I won't soft-pedal them, no 
matter what decision I make concerning Rampart. And I'm going to do something about 
the Haluk situation, too." 

"Send out more hothead media releases denouncing the trade agreement?" He gave a 
snort of derisive laughter. "Fat lot of good that'll do. The deal's done, and Rampart's in 
the Haluk Consortium with both feet." 

I said, "Those slippery Haluk bastards are making fools of us, pretending they've given 
up their aggressive expansion policy. They're already pressuring the Assembly to grant 
them more Rampart Mandate worlds immediately." 

Simon shrugged and sipped his drink. "So long as the xenos pay a good price in 
ultraheavy elements, they'll likely get what they want." 

I let loose a flare of temper. "And that's just dandy for you and for the other Concerns 
in the consortium, isn't it! Business as usual. Everybody wallows in profits, never looking 
beyond the bottom line. Meanwhile, nobody's quite sure just how much expanding the 
Haluk intend to do! How many of them are out there in that star-cluster, anyhow, 
champing at the bit to emigrate to the Milky Way? ... We don't know! They don't allow 
visitors to their cluster and they vaporize trespassers. And your consortium doesn't give a 
rat's ass about the Haluk's long-range intentions so long as trade keeps booming." 

"Zone Patrol and the SXA will keep an eye out for funny stuff. It's not the 
consortium's responsibility to monitor a sovereign alien race." 

"No," I agreed. "So perhaps someone else will have to look into the matter." 

A faint expression of alarm flitted behind his eyes. "Who'd be nutty enough to do that? 


Don't tell me you—" 

"I can't believe you've forgotten what the Haluk did!" I yelled. Simon blinked and 
backed away from me. "Marooning me on that goddamn comet... collaborating with 
Drummond's goons ... snatching Rampart World colonists and using them as slave labor 
and lab rats! And what about those two hundred human templates on Dagasatt that got 
blown to hell along with the Haluk demiclones? The Haluk were manufacturing fake 
humans to spy on us, and nobody seems to care why." 

"Industrial espionage," he opined. "To infiltrate Rampart and Gala—why else? They 
were desperate to obtain our PD32:C2 genen vector. The demiclone spies were gonna 
help 'em get more of the stuff in some scheme or other. But now they can buy the vector 
from Rampart on the open market, so the demiclone thing is a dead issue." 

"You think so, do you?" 

"Yes, dammit, I do!" He did a double take at my skeptical sneer. "What? You think the 
blue-balls put demi moles into some human government agency? You still think they're 
cooking up a fuckin' war?" 

"We've got lots of good stuff the Haluk want besides PD32:C2. Why should they buy 
it in dribs and drabs for a whopping high price over a long period of time if they can take 
it for free? And get unlimited lebensraum besides?" 

"Horse puckey," Simon scoffed. 

"They've hated and feared humanity ever since we came into the Perseus Spur and 
stopped their colonial expansion cold. They covet our superior technology and envy our 
ability to stay awake and active all year 'round. That kind of mind-set didn't evaporate 
when they signed a couple of treaties two years ago." 

"Wouldn't be the first time in history that old enemies kissed and made up," Simon 
said reasonably. "Hey—look at you and me! The Haluk've tried to make amends for the 
past. Agreed to pay reparations to the families of the kidnapped engineers and template 
victims. Paid Rampart for deprivation of employee services and the damage done on 
Cravat, too." 

"And that's supposed to wipe the slate clean? I suppose you don't give a damn that 
Haluk are flooding into the Perseus Spur by the millions. The fifteen new T-2 worlds they 
were granted by the Assembly last year are already bursting at the seams." 

He finished off his drink. "They pay through the snoot for Rampart Mandate planets. 
So why not?" 

"If their long-range expansion strategy includes forcible penetration of the Milky 
Way," I said in a low voice, "there are lots of reasons why not." 

"Nobody believes they'd make war except you, son. And you don't have one smidgen 
of proof to back it up." 

I enumerated what I considered to be valid evidence. "Uno: the ruthless way they went 
after PD32:C2 to erase their allomorphism. Dos: their refusal to allow unrestricted 
inspection of their home worlds or Spur colonies by humanity. Tres: the vastly 
overpopulated planets of their home star-cluster. And if they continue to eradicate their 
allomorphic trait and no longer have half their people in hibernation at any given time, 
they'll need even more room! ... Do you have any idea how many top-line transports the 
Haluk have purchased from Bodascon over the past couple of years? Nearly three 
hundred! And that doesn't count the starships they're building on their own, copying 
human high technology" 


"That's not proof, that's unsupported inference—worthless as a bucket of mule piss." 

"I'll find evidence that not even the ostriches in the Assembly can ignore. Don't think I 
haven't been working on it! And now that the Gala case is won, I intend to work even 
harder." 

Simon turned his back on me and headed for the booze table. He uncorked the bottle 
of rare old Hirsch bourbon and half filled his Waterford tumbler. No water to dilute it this 
time. He moved toward the open French doors. "Let's step outside. I need a breath of 
fresh air, and you could use cooling down yourself." 

I padded reluctantly after him, bringing my beer. The patio flagstones were chilly, and 
a cutting breeze came from the west. Discreet gas-flame lanterns mounted on low posts 
had come on automatically at dusk, giving soft illumination to the expanse of irrigated 
lawn, the surrounding gardens, and the driveways that led to the other buildings. The 
main house stood on a rise and had a magnificent view of the mountains that completely 
surrounded the ranch. Now, with night having fallen and no moon, the sky was crowded 
with incredible numbers of stars and banded by the Milky Way. The Perseus Spur, at the 
galactic rim fourteen thousand light-years from Earth's solar system, was visible if you 
looked carefully to the north; but the small Haluk Cluster that lay seventeen thousand 
light-years farther out from the Spur's tip was hidden by intervening dustclouds. No one 
had known it existed until human explorers crossed the Black Gap. 

My father gave a sigh that was just short of being theatrical. "Damn, that sky's a pretty 
sight. I never get tired of high-desert nights." 

"I do," I said evenly, "when I'm standing on a cold stone pavement in my stocking 
feet." 

He chuckled uneasily. Then came a very long silence while he lowered the level of his 
costly panther pee and I finished off my beer. His voice was somber when he finally said, 
"Do you really hate me so much, Asa? That you'd abandon Rampart when it needs you, 
just to get even with your old man?" 

"I don't hate you, Simon. You and I just have different priorities. We always have. A 
long time ago you tried to bully me into accepting yours. When I rebelled, you washed 
your hands of me ... until you were desperate for my help." 

"That's true enough. And you came through like a champ, several times over. I'm 
damn grateful." 

"Then let it go at that." I couldn't keep the bitterness out of my tone. "It's not true that 
Rampart needs me now. Eve has done a marvelous job as CEO during the past three 
years. She's restructured top management and gained the full confidence of the Macrodur 
financiers. There's no reason to believe that she and her team won't be able to handle the 
Gala consolidation just as competently, provided you continue as chairman and give her 
the benefit of your experience. There's nothing inherently rotten in Galapharma, you 
know. Its basic corporate infrastructure is sound. Alistair Drummond was a 
megalomaniac and a crook, but he was also a brilliant businessman. And he was right to 
believe that Rampart and Galapharma are ideal corporate harness mates. All Eve has to 
do is weed out the handful of bad apples who were direct participants in the conspiracy, 
and integrate Gala's management into Rampart's." 

"You make it sound simple—but it's not. Your sister's an outstanding executive officer 
and she's come far in a very short time. But she's still just a beginner in the top Concern 
ranks, about to start swimming with some very large sharks. She wants you to be part of 


Rampart just as much as I do." 

"I doubt it." 

He looked at me with what seemed to be genuine puzzlement. "What's that supposed 
to mean?" 

"You read my interview with the Journal reporter. Eve has, too, by now. Did you 
think I was just playing mind-games with the guy when I talked about the Reversionist 
Principles—and possibly applying them to Rampart if I accept the chairmanship?" 

He didn't reply. 

"Come on back inside," I said. "My feet are freezing—as you know damned well—
and I haven't had my supper yet. Starry vistas don't make me choke up the way they used 
to." 

He followed me and closed the French doors behind us. "I wouldn't mind a little snack 
myself. I'll talk to Rosalia." 

"Chili con carne and a big salad for me. She knows what I like." 

"I'll just have me some shrimp nachos with Navajo sheep cheese and salsa." 

He contacted the cook through the old-fashioned intercom. Domestic robotics had 
been taboo in the original Sky Ranch main house because my late mother Katje believed 
that they deprived human beings of jobs and had the potential to invade privacy. When 
Simon rebuilt after the explosion, he restored the place exactly as it had been before. 

I stood on the hearth and warmed my feet, declining his offer of another shot of 
whiskey and accepting more beer. Then we arranged ourselves on opposite sides of the 
petrified wood table and waited for the food. 

"So you really did mean it," Simon said tentatively, "when you threatened to screw up 
Rampart's Insap policy if you became chairman." 

"Not screw up. Modify humanely. Preindustrial natives should get more than a few 
jobs when their planet is exploited by humanity. They deserve a stake in the profits. Plus 
subsidized education options for those races that can take advantage of them. Anything 
short of that is unjust—and I'm not alone in believing that's true." 

"Dammit, Asa, it's just not practical! Usually it takes years before a newly developed 
world starts showing a profit. What about our human stakeholders and the Macrodur 
finance people? You think they'll just lie down, roll over, and let you scratch their 
rummies when you spring this crackpot scheme on 'em? And what the hell will happen 
when Insaps on our new ex-Galapharma Orion Arm worlds decide they want the same 
deal as the Perseus planets?" 

"We give it to them. In a prudent manner, over a reasonable period of time. Education 
first, then stakeholdership." 

"It won't work! Way back when interstellar commerce first got going, a few limp-
weenie outfits tried to organize human-alien cooperatives and suchlike shit. The Insaps 
got uppity ideas, wanted a bigger and bigger piece of the enchilada. First thing you know, 
the humans had full-blown worker insurrections to deal with. Preindustrial xenos can't be 
treated like human beings! Some of 'em are barely rational. Others are stuck at the tribal 
or feudal social level and only respect an iron fist. Some have goofy counterproductive 
customs that preclude any kind of discipline. Most don't understand free enterprise at 
all!" 

"I didn't say I thought the modification would be easy. Perhaps the policy won't be 
feasible with marginally sapient peoples. But if I become Rampart chairman, the board 


members will have to accept the policy." 

"Even if it throws the Concern into chaos?" 

"I'll do my utmost to see that doesn't happen. But yes— I'm willing to take a huge risk 
in hopes that Rampart's example will spread to others of the Hundred Concerns. If you 
and Eve and the board of directors are afraid I'll fail, then forget about me. Keep your 
chairmanship. I'll do what I can to promote Reversionism in other ways." 

I sat back then waiting for the bluster, the combination of wheedling and threats that 
he'd used to bulldoze me in the past. Either that or he'd withdraw the nomination 
forthwith. 

All he said was, "Son, I can't retain the chairmanship. I'm no good for it anymore. I'm 
too old." 

I couldn't help a snort of disbelieving laughter. "You're healthy as a horse! You could 
carry on for another twenty years." 

A slight, rueful smile lifted his thin lips. "Nothing wrong with me physically. I'm old 
inside my skull. Tired. Running out of steam and moxie. It happens ... But I'm smart 
enough to recognize that I'm past it, and that it's time for me to step down. Rampart'll get 
a new chairman one way or t'other. Eve doesn't want the job, and neither does Gunter 
Eckert or Caleb Millstone. They're happy where they are. You refuse, what might happen 
is we'd have to accept Ellington or some other Macrodur nominee because of the twenty 
percent stake they got from me in the venture credit scheme." 

"Well, shit," I muttered, mainly because I couldn't think of anything else to say. 

"Adam Stanislawski likes you," Simon said. "Ellington does, too. Most of the other 
Macrodur wheels were mighty impressed with your legal tactics against Gala." He 
scowled and looked away. "Of course, that was before you came out with that 
chuckleheaded interview in the Journal—all in living color, no less, posed against an 
Arizona sunset with a carbine in your armpit like Wyatt-fuckin'-Earp. God knows what 
the Macrodur directors think about you now." 

"The reporter posted our live conversation?" I was aghast. According to stubborn 
tradition, conservative news media such as the Journal nearly always reported news in a 
readonly format. Sensational video clips were for the tabloids. 

"Ee-yup," Simon drawled, nodding at the magslate on the coffee table. "Check it out if 
you like. You sure come off as one trigger-happy cowpoke, son," 

"Rats!" I didn't bother to pick up the slate. Jordan Sensen-brenner had got the last 
laugh after all. "I guess I did shoot myself in the foot this time. Sorry. I'll take full blame 
for my idiocy, try to smooth things over with Macrodur if I can." 

"Do it soon." The brief flash of amusement faded from Simon's face and he looked 
draggle-tail weary. 

"I'll go to Toronto tomorrow," I said. "And I hereby swear off impromptu 
interviews—at least until I decide what to do about your proposal." 

"You better make up your mind pretty damned quick." 

"I won't be stampeded, Pop. You know me better than that." His eyes lit up as I made 
rare use of the paternal familiar. "When I gave that interview, I was pretty certain I'd 
reject your offer. Now..." I shook my head. "You'd still want me, knowing what I'd do 
with the chairmanship?" 

"I figure you're bound and determined to give Reverse activism a try. But I don't think 
for a minute you'd run Rampart into the ground just to make some quixotic philosophical 


point. Shit—maybe you're right and the Hundred Concerns are wrong! Stranger things 
have happened." 

"I need time to think," I insisted. "There are things I could accomplish in the political 
arena that might be difficult to pull off if I were a mere businessman." 

"It'll be half a year at least before the Galapharma dismantling protocol is finalized and 
the Concerns merge," Simon pointed out. "I guess I can hold the fort that long. Nothing 
much can happen till then." 

"I guess not." 

Clairvoyance has never been my strong suit, nor Simon's, either. 

"So take a nice long vacation," he urged me. "God knows you earned it." 

"I might go out to Kedge-Lockaby for a couple of months. I'll be fairly safe from 
media harassment there. The locals in the Out Islands aren't fond of busybodies. I can 
drive my submarine and scuba-dive and weigh the options. If you need my input for 
something of cosmic importance, my next door neighbor on Eyebrow Cay has a subspace 
communicator. He'll know how to find me. You remember him: Mimo Bermudez." 

A nod. "The old smuggler. Nearly as squirrelly as you." 

"My best friend. Another man with quixotic principles." 

We sat in silence for a time, watching the fire. Then, on impulse, I asked him, "Did 
you ever hear of another elderly smuggler named Barky Tregarth? He operated out in the 
Spur over forty years ago, peddling contraband weaponry and materiel to the Haluk and 
Qastt." 

"Damn! I haven't thought about Barky for years. How'd you hear about him? From 
Bermudez?" 

"Yes." And Karl Nazarian had known about the old crook, too. 

Simon's brow wrinkled thoughtfully. "Hamilcar Barca Tregarth, teller of tall tales! 
Spun this crazy yarn about going to the Haluk Cluster on a bet, back when Galapharma 
owned the Spur. Said he ran rings around their patrols, then managed to sweet-talk the 
Haluk leadership into letting him land on one of their major worlds to refuel. Even 
claimed the aliens gave him the key to the city because he reminded 'em of some 
legendary Haluk hero. The poor bastard never did collect on the bet—and it was a sizable 
one. Seems nobody believed his story when he got back to the Spur. The souvenir he 
claimed he got from the Haluk could've come from anywhere." 

"Did you meet Tregarth personally?" 

"Once. Before his alleged trip. I had a drink with the guy in a saloon on Hadrach, 
maybe half a dozen years after Rampart got the Perseus Mandate. Jesus, he was a piece o' 
work! Sharp as a Buck knife and talk an arm and leg off you. My Lord, Barky'd be over a 
hundred twenty years old if he's still alive." 

"Do you think his story about going to the Haluk Cluster might have been true?" 

"Most folks thought he was lying in his teeth. Especially those in on the bet. But 
Barky sure as shit ran a lot of guns to the eleven Blueberry colonies in the Spur when 
Rampart was just getting started. Zone Patrol finally nabbed his ass— when?—maybe 
just after the turn of the century. Somebody broke him out of the Tyrins slammer before 
he came to trial. He was Thrown Away in absentia. Never operated in the Spur again." 
Simon eyed me dubiously. "What's your interest in Barky Tregarth, anyhow?" 

I was saved from having to answer by a gentle knocking at the inner door of the living 
room. It opened and the cook, Rosalia Alejo-Mertz, came in with a food-laden serving 


cart. "I hope you two are hungry," she said. "I brought some extra things I happened to 
have cluttering up the kitchen. Spit-roasted turkey slices, duck liver pate, and wild 
strawberry shortcake." 

In an instant Simon forgot about Barky Tregarth. "Rosie, you angel! Me'n Asa are 
hungry enough to eat a folded tarp and burp grommets!" 

We began helping ourselves to huge portions of everything. Rosie smiled at us 
benignly and left us to our supper. Time for further distraction away from the Barky 
Hunt. I said, "Tomorrow I intend to have a little chat with Adam Stanislawski at 
Macrodur, see if I can do damage control for the Journal gaffe." 

"Good idea," Simon said. "At least get his reaction to your nomination, so we know 
where we stand." 

I spooned chili into my face and talked with my mouth full. "I've decided to make a 
surprise visit to Galapharma Tower, too." 

Simon stopped short in the act of devouring his fifth shrimp nacho. "Why?" he asked 
suspiciously. 

Oops. Maybe I shouldn't have mentioned that. A Freudian slip? My wise old pal Mimo 
Bermudez would have called it seeking Big Daddy's approval even as I spit in his eye. 

"It's something I've been planning for some time, contingent on our winning the court 
case. There's an informal request I want to put to their top brass—preferably Lorne 
Buchanan, the CEO—while they're still reeling from the verdict. If Gala gives me what I 
want, I'm ready to promise that Rampart will mitigate bloodshed among Gala's 
management during the consolidation. Maybe try to stave off criminal prosecution, too." 

My father's eyes narrowed. "Informal request? What the fuck kind of informal 
request?" "I'd rather not say." Because it involved sharp practice at best, and trade-treaty 
violations at worst. But it did have the potential for uncovering Haluk double-dealing, so 
I reckoned the risk was worth it. 

Simon exploded. "Dammit, Asa! You're not the boss hand of this outfit yet. Tell me 
what you're up to!" 

Well, I'd opened my big yap. 

"I'm going to suggest that Gala immediately give me everything they have concerning 
the allomorph trait eradication and demiclone procedures that they developed for the 
Haluk. Most specifically, I want the genetic marker that Emily Konigsberg incorporated 
into the demicloning process. The thing that ID's the fake humans. The marker was 
Drummond's secret way of keeping tabs on the Haluk scheme. Emily told Eve that the 
alien leader, the Servant of Servants, knew nothing about the marker. I also want 
complete details about the clandestine demiclone labs that were in operation prior to the 
Dagasatt blowup. Karl Nazarian and his crew obtained some intelligence about them 
from the data-dump of Chispa Dos, that starship I stole from the Galapharma agent. But 
it needs verification from another source before we can present it as hard evidence." 

Speechless with consternation, Simon gaped at me. I plowed on. 

"I also want to know how many imitation human beings those demiclone labs 
produced. Someone at Galapharma knows! Its security people were in charge of most of 
the demi facilities, and its agents tracked every gram of PD32:C2 illegally sold to the 
aliens." 

Simon relaxed in premature relief. "All those incriminating Gala files were sealed by 
the Secretariat for Xenoaffairs as part of the new Haluk nonaggression pact." 


"I intend to unseal them—very carefully—and pass on selected excerpts to an 
influential friend of mine in the Commonwealth Assembly. Efrem Sontag is Chairman of 
the Xenoaffairs Oversight Committee. He'd go along with immunity for the Gala execs 
involved if I asked him to." 

"What the fuckin' hell do you hope to accomplish?" Simon exclaimed furiously. 

"You were wrong when you said I was the only one dubious about the Haluk. Sontag 
has already initiated a secret probe of demiclone shenanigans, based on intelligence 
supplied by me right after the Dagasatt affair. He also believes that SXA's cover-up deal 
with the aliens stank to high heaven, even if it did pave the way for the new trade treaty." 

"But... Christ on a crutch! Something like this could swamp the consortium if the 
Haluk find out!" 

"Nonsense. The aliens won't like it, but they'll hardly stop buying human products. 
You're going to have to trust me on this, Pop. We need this information. I know Gala was 
supposed to have surrendered all the incriminating data to Xenoaffairs, but you can bet 
your left nut that somebody in the Concern kept copies—just in case Gala won the civil 
case and it needed an ace in the hole sometime in the future. As an edge against other 
consortium members, maybe. Or even against the Haluk themselves. Alistair Drummond 
didn't trust our needy blue buddies either." 

"Couldn't you hold off until—" 

"No. Right now, I'm in a perfect position to exert pressure on Galapharma's top 
officers, while they're afraid of losing their precious jobs and stakeholdings. If I wait for 
the consolidation, it could be too late. Gala will wipe the computers clean rather than take 
a chance that Rampart would discover the data. They could be doing it right now." 

"Maybe it's done." 

"No—they'd wait until the trial verdict was in." 

"You really got a wild blue hair up your ass, don't you, boy?" 

"I'm convinced the Haluk are mortally dangerous, yes." 

"God almighty!" My father shook his head. "All right. Put your goddamn request to 
Lorne Buchanan. Nobody else. He's got the most to lose in the consolidation, and he has 
the power to get what you want if anyone does." 

"I promise to use the utmost discretion. I'll get Ef Sontag to promise the same. We 
won't go public unless we have proof of malicious intent by the Haluk." 

Simon pushed his plate of food away, shaking his head, and got to his feet. "You just 
can't leave things be, can you? Always lookin' to stir up trouble." 

"Where the Haluk are concerned, damn right I am. But I'll do it as quietly as possible 
now—for Rampart's sake. I'm not trying to dissolve the Haluk trade treaty, and I certainly 
don't intend to force them back into their overcrowded star-cluster. But I do aim to make 
sure they behave if they move into our neighborhood." 

"Arrogant, self-righteous young prick!" Simon growled. "Who elected you Speaker of 
the Commonwealth Assembly?" 

"Nobody," I said. "Frankly, I'd rather be a beach bum on Kedge-Lockaby. But if I 
decide to give Rampart's chairmanship a pass, I may just turn into the meanest goddamn 
Reversionist beach bum you and the Assembly and the Hundred Concerns and the Haluk 
ever met." 

"I've lost my appetite," my father said unhappily, heading for the door. "I'm going to 
bed." 


"You can always fire me," I called after him. "By law, I'd revert instantly to 
Throwaway status. I'd be out of the galactic poker game for keeps and out of your 
corporate hair." 

"Nope," Simon Frost said. "Gonna let my bet on you ride. God help us all." 

The door closed behind him. 

I decided it was high time for some more of Jack Daniel's best. Maybe even a double. 

—— 

Later, when it was a reasonable hour on Kedge-Lockaby's Eyebrow Cay, I called 
Mimo Bermudez on the ranch's sub-space com. He'd seen the Journal posting and 
congratulated me on Rampart's legal triumph while being tactful about Simon's notion to 
promote me beyond my station. 

Then we got around to the reason for my call: the Barky Hunt. Mimo had promised to 
make discreet inquiries about the ancient gunrunner among doddering members of the 
Spur underworld. My friend's courtly Mexican manners had thus far precluded his asking 
me for an explanation. 

"I found several people who knew Tregarth in the old days," Mimo said, "even a few 
who had participated in the original wager that supposedly sent him off on his incredible 
journey. All but one of those that I spoke to branded Tregarth a bare-faced liar with an 
overly fertile imagination. The exception was a certain vejarron named Clifton Castle 
who once worked as a fence on Tyrins. After Tregarth escaped from the lockup there, he 
contacted Castle and sold him an extremely rare jewel to finance his flight back to the 
Orion Arm. It was a exotic fossil cabochon set in platinum—beyond a doubt Haluk in 
origin. Tregarth claimed it had been a gift from the official of a planet he visited in the 
Haluk Cluster." 

"He might also have got it from one of their Spur colonies." 

"That's always a possibility. Clifton Castle had another interesting piece of 
information. Tregarth made a condition that the fossil not be resold for one month, saying 
he hoped to buy it back—at a premium, of course—since it was his only souvenir of the 
great adventure." 

"Pawning the thing. Did Barky redeem it?" 

"Yes, three weeks later. Castle sent it by registered StelEx to the planet Famagusta in 
Sector 5. This happened in the year 2201." 

"I don't suppose this Castle knows whether Barky is still alive." 

"He had no idea. I could send out more feelers, but as you know, my principal sources 
are in the Perseus Spur, not the inner Orion Arm. You might have better luck consulting 
our mutual friend, Chief Superintendent Jake Silver. Tregarth might be in the CCID 
database." 

"Maybe I'll talk to Jake. I'm heading for Toronto tomorrow." 

My pal's dark eyes peered from thoughtful slits. "You've never told me why you're so 
anxious to find this geriatric contrabandista" 

"Mimo, it's better you don't know." 

He shook his frowsy head in chagrin. "Helly, Helly, Helly. It's rather obvious, isn't it? 
You still believe that the Haluk intend to wage war on humanity." 

"I think they might—if their population pressure is exceptionally severe. This guy 
Tregarth might be dead or he might be a total shuck-and-jive artist, the biggest liar since 
Baron Munchausen. On the other hand, he might just know more about our mysterious 


blue buddies than any other human being. I want to talk to him." 

"And then what?" 

I smiled at the SS com screen. "I've got a sabbatical coming, while the Galapharma 
settlement is sorted out and I decide whether to accept the Rampart chairmanship. I told 
my father I'd spend the time loafing on K-L—but it might be more fun to take my 
modified Y770 starship on a grand tour." 

"Caracoles!" The semiretired Smuggler King of the Perseus Spur immediately 
guessed what I had in mind and was appalled. "Please tell me you're joking!" 

"Of course I am," I lied. 

"I'm relieved to hear it. You realize that a private individual who traveled to the Haluk 
Cluster would violate both the nonaggression pact and the trade treaty with that race, 
laying himself open to sanctions from both the Xenoaffairs and Interstellar Commerce 
Secretariats. Every asset the individual possessed might be seized—and he himself would 
not only be disenfranchised, but probably also incarcerated without possibility of parole." 

"Unless the illegal expedition was accomplished without the individual being caught. 
And the individual came back with significant intelligence data." 

"Why you?" my old friend exclaimed in exasperation. 

"Who else?" I retorted. "I've got the inclination and time to spare. I've also got the 
ship." 

My personal blitzboat was named Makebate—an old word meaning "troublemaker." 
She was a Rampart executive perquisite, the only expensive toy I'd allowed myself 
during the two tedious years of brain-bending legal work associated with the Galapharma 
trial. I'd managed to take only rare brief jaunts in her to visit my friends on Kedge-
Lockaby in the Spur. A chance remark of Mimo's at a luau on Eyebrow Cay three months 
ago had planted the seed for the Barky Hunt... and what might follow if it was successful 
and the old crook really did have important information about the Haluk Cluster worlds. 

Returning to Toronto for the climactic part of the trial, I had arranged for Rampart 
Fleet Maintenance technicians to modify Makebate while I was grounded. Her fuel 
bunkers had been greatly enlarged and her weaponry significantly beefed up. She now 
carried state-of-the-art sublight drive dissimulators for stealthy near-planet maneuvering 
and orbital concealment. I was having special bodycount gadgetry installed that would 
make clandestine fly-by census scans of hostile planets feasible, and I also intended to 
look for warships. The Commonwealth seemed content to believe that massive Haluk 
purchases of astrogational equipment were intended for use in colonial transports; I 
thought that notion was pure bovine excrement. 

Mimo sighed. "Always the cowboy! I had hopes that your stint as Rampart's Chief 
Legal Officer would have mellowed you." 

"Tourism can be amusing and educational," I said. "Wanna come along? I could use 
some human company. Talking to the ship's computer gets boring after a few days. And 
there's always the possibility of a good fight." 

"And a quick death. Or worse, if you're captured." 

I just grinned at him. "I'm going to count blue noses and look for blue battleboats 
whether or not the Barky Hunt works out. Come on! It'll be a hoot." 

"Unfortunately I have a previous engagement in the tank." 

It took me a moment to realize what he was saying. "The—The tank?" 

"I'd accompany you to the Haluk Cluster if I could, Helly, if only to keep you out of 


trouble. After all, I'm a much better shot with a photon cannon! I'm also curious how the 
Haluk manage to mine transactinides, given their technology lag. But this old body of 
mine is in need of serious repair. I must go into dystasis in Rampart Central's big hospital 
on Seriphos, since the doctors at the Big Beach don't have the resources to deal with my 
case." 

I tried not to show my dismay. Mimo was a man in late middle age, but as far as I 
knew, he was healthy. "So. It's something serious?" 

"It is," he said gently. "A flare-up of an old problem. However, the prognosis is good. 
All that's necessary is a grotesque amount of money to pay for the sixteen-week 
procedure. No importa dos cojones." His standard disclaimer: It doesn't matter two balls' 
worth. 

Of course money was no problem to Mimo. Decades of smuggling fine liquor, Cuban 
cigars, premium coffee, and other luxuries past Rampart excise collectors had made him 
one of the wealthiest private individuals in the Perseus Spur. But I felt a pang of guilt as I 
recalled the threadbare state of Kedge-Lockaby's modest little hospital. I should have 
done something about that a long time ago, now that I had the means. K-L had been good 
to me. 

And so had Captain Guillermo Bermudez Obregon. 

I said, "You have a nice long soak in the tank, Meem. Cure what ails you. With luck, 
I'll be there on Seriphos waiting for your rollout. I'll ferry you back to K-L and wait on 
you hand and foot while you convalesce. I owe you, amigo." 

"All you owe me is staying alive." He was no longer meeting my gaze. "For the sake 
of prudence, I've sent a small package to your office in Rampart Tower via StelEx. You 
should find it waiting when you arrive tomorrow. Please take good care of what's inside. 
Do what must be done if... circumstances warrant." 

I felt a cold breath of irrational dread and pushed it aside, knowing that Mimo was 
going to be fine. The hospital at Rampart Central on Seriphos had the finest genetic 
engineering therapy department in Zone 23, and I'd pull strings to make certain that 
Mimo had Ultra Important Patient status. 

The rest of our conversation was little more than gossip about our mutual friends on 
Eyebrow Cay. Eventually we told each other good-night and signed off. 

I left the com center and shuffled through the darkened ranch house toward my 
bedroom, brooding about mortality and about two very different old men and the 
influences they'd had on my life. 

It had been a busy day. Tomorrow would be even busier in Toronto. If Lorne 
Buchanan yielded to my pressure, I'd have to touch base with Efrem Sontag and arrange 
for him to take charge of the sensitive information. 

And there was Jake Silver. Maybe he and I could have dinner, perhaps catch the 
acclaimed new production of Macbeth at the Winter Garden Theater, if he hadn't already 
seen it. Both of us were Shakespeare buffs. The Bard had a keen understanding of the 
criminal mind, and so did Jake and I. 

As it happened, I never got to see the play. The damned criminal minds were already 
cooking up a different sort of melodrama. 

Starring me. 


Chapter 3 

 

Chief Superintendent Jacob Silver of the Commonwealth Criminal Investigation 
Department was a man done wrong by fate, who managed to crawl out of life's manure 
pile with a rose in his teeth. 

He reminded me a bit of myself. 

Banished to the outermost Perseus Spur for daring to blow the whistle on a superior 
who'd taken a big bribe from the Carnelian Concern, the powerful producer of electronic 
weapons and devices, Jake Silver had been demoted to the tiny Public Safety Force of 
freesoil Kedge-Lockaby. He'd been stuck in this dead-end office on a minor resort world 
and Throwaway haven for nearly ten years before I arrived in 2229, newly 
disenfranchised and determined to pickle my brain in ethanol as a prelude to suicide. 

Jake had no difficulty ferreting out the true identity of the derelict who called himself 
Helmut Icicle when I applied for K-L resident status. During my slow rehabilitation, he 
occasionally called upon my ICS expertise to outwit visiting corporate connivers—most 
notably a gang of Native American sharpies from Infinitum, the monster entertainment 
Concern, who tried to seize control of K-L's casino. A takeover would have deprived the 
little planet's schools of their principal source of revenue. I showed Jake how to legally 
spike the redskins' guns, and he and I became cautious friends. 

He risked his professional neck to help me during Rampart's fight with Galapharma. 
So I made a promise—rashly improbable at the time—to do my damnedest to get him 
posted back to Earth. I was able to come through for Jake when Simon and Eve pressured 
me to head up the legal case against Gala. Rampart itself didn't have the political clout to 
bring the Super back to his family in Toronto, but its prestigious venture-credit 
stakeholder, Macrodur Concern, sure as hell did. 

Macrodur is the proverbial 400-kilo gorilla, the largest and most connected of the Big 
Seven Concerns by reason of its monopoly on computer products. I made Jake Silver's 
reinstatement—with promotion—at CCID headquarters a condition of my acceptance of 
the interim CLO gig. Macrodur wanted me as chief architect of the case against Gala just 
as badly as Rampart did. The gorilla leaned. The fix went in. 

The upshot was that Jake Silver returned to a cushy staff job in the capital cop shop. 
He and I had a celebratory dinner at Truffles, then for two years we mostly went our 
separate ways. 

—— 

Using the ranch's secure landline, I called him before breakfast on the morning after 
the big verdict, announcing myself to his assistant as "Helmut Icicle, confidential 
informant." 

The face that appeared on my vidphone display was leaner than it had been on K-L 
and more mastifflike. The jowls drooped and the shrewd, watchful eyes peered from deep 
pouches that were not disfiguring but seemed oddly appropriate to a watchdog lawman. 
Chief Superintendent Jacob Silver was now fifty-six years old, no longer the sweaty, 
sartorially challenged mess I'd known on K-L's Big Beach. He wore a black cashmere 
sweater vest over an expensive pink designer shirt, and his gray hair was carefully styled. 

Jake's greeting, however, had all its old familiar charm. 

"Mother-o'-pearl!" he groaned. "If it isn't Hell-Butt, the conquering shyster and tsar of 
tsuris. I smell trouble... Don't tell me! Payoff day is here. You want reciprocity for 


engineering my transfer, and I have to put my decrepit cock on the block for you again 
and risk losing my pension." 

"I need a very small favor," I soothed him. "Nothing to jeopardize your desk-riding 
posterior. How are Marie and the kids and the grandkids?" 

His forbidding features relaxed into a rare broad smile. "They couldn't be better, 
thanks to you. Nice going, shooting down Galapharma." He chortled wickedly. "On the 
other hand, that interview in the Wall Street Journal sure made you look like a horse's 
patoot. You gonna hook up with Rampart permanently now?" 

"I'm thinking about it. I may postpone the decision indefinitely. Meanwhile, I'm doing 
some private investigating. I need to find a guy." 

Jake rolled his eyes. "Here it comes ..." 

"Hamilcar Barca Tregarth," I said. "Nicknamed Barky. Disenfranchised for 
gunrunning and peddling embargoed high tech to aliens around 2201. He used to operate 
in the Spur but fled to the inner Orion Arm or maybe the Sag Whorl after escaping 
custody on Tyrins. He might still be alive." 

"That's it?" Jake seemed disappointed. 

"Locate Barky Tregarth for me, Super. I'll be grateful. Buy you a steak tonight at 
Carman's. Also treat you to Macbeth if you're free. Got two good seats." 

" 'By the pricking of my thumbs,'" Jake quoted the Scottish play," 'something wicked 
this way comes!' I hope that's not you, Hell-Butt." 

"Absolutely not. I am a paragon of corporate probity. For the moment, anyhow." 

"Okay. I accept your offer to dine. Sorry about the Shakespeare, but Marie and I saw 
the production last week. Bring one of your ladies and give her a treat. Micklewhite and 
Dorsey are outstanding as Lord and Lady M. The set designers got the holo FX right 
without screwing up the traditional mise-en-scene." 

"Always a good thing." 

"You want to hold a minute, I'll check the roster of lowlifes for Tregarth. We might hit 
an instant jackpot. Why is his name familiar?" 

He turned away from the phone to consult his computer. 

I considered his suggestion about feminine companionship only momentarily. My sex 
life had been pretty arid during the trial, due to the long hours of grinding work. When I 
did take a rare break, it had invariably been a casual fling with one of the politically 
active sophisticates I'd met through the Reversionist Party. Their partisan intensity had 
been a welcome distraction from the legal fray. 

But now, with the trial over and my imprudent blabbering a hot topic on the capital 
grapevine, the last thing I needed was the company of a political woman. I'd go to the 
play alone. 

Jake Silver was emitting a ruminative humming sound as he searched for my quarry. 
Finally: "Last domicile of record for our chum is on Manala, Sector 4. It's one of those 
aster-oidal fueling way stations located at the rim of the Sagittarius Whorl, almost out in 
Red Gap. Nasty shithole, as I recall, but handy to the trans-ack producers. Eleven years 
ago one H. B. Tregarth was nabbed and fined a whopper for violating the Y'tata high-tech 
weaponry trade interdiction. He left Manala and hasn't been arrested since, or compelled 
to submit a verifying DNA sample for any other reason. He's not in the rolls of the 
officially deceased, either—which may or may not prove anything. He might have died 
without a genetic assay. Most Throwaways do. As far as the Commonwealth of Human 


Worlds is concerned, your Barky doesn't exist." 

"Rats. I was afraid this wouldn't be easy." 

Jake glowered at me. "You really really need to find him?" 

"Yes." 

"May I ask why?" 

All I said was, "Is there any unofficial way you can track him down?" 

"There are always ways. They can take time, which I don't have, and cost money, of 
which I am chronically short. Why don't you hire one of the big tracer outfits? Or—" He 
broke off. You could almost see the legendary lightbulb clicking on above his head. 
"Wait a second, now. Tregarth last came to our attention peddling actinic-beam weaponry 
from a Carnelian subsidiary to the Y'tata. It occurs to me there's something quick and 
dirty I could try." 

"Do it." 

"Meet me in the lobby of CCID HQ about 1730 hours. Bring an open-ended blind EFT 
card. If my idea pans out, maybe you can use the card to buy something besides a night 
on the town." 

He ended the call and I went to breakfast, whistling "Empty Saddles in the Old 
Corral." 

—— 

Rosalia served me huevos rancheros and a honey-sweet Chilean watermelon the size 
of a grapefruit, remarking that my father had already left for Toronto in his private 
hopper. Not in a good mood. 

"Too bad," I remarked. "I hope it wasn't something I said." 

I'd already talked to Jane Nelligan at Rampart Tower, a couple of time zones ahead of 
Arizona, asking her to get a status report on the refit job on Makebate and make 
appointments with Adam Stanislawski and Lorne Buchanan. She called back as I was 
finishing my second cup of coffee, and I answered on my pocket phone. 

"Chairman Stanislawski has a very crowded schedule today," she said briskly. "He can 
see you for fifteen minutes at noon in his office at Macrodur Tower if that'll suffice. 
Otherwise he's not available till Monday." 

Jane is always brisk, as well as tactful and awesomely efficient. Since I am nothing of 
the sort, I value her as a pearl beyond price. She is married to the head vet at the Sunder-
land Racecourse, has twin sons in business school at Commonwealth UT, and copes like 
a steely eyed drill sergeant with the forty-six gung-ho lawyers who comprise Rampart's 
Toronto-based legal staff. 

I told Jane that a noon touch-and-go at Macrodur was dandy. All I wanted to do was 
get Adam's reaction to my nomination. Unless I missed my guess, his opinion was going 
to coincide with my own and save me a lot of aggravation with Simon and Eve. 

"Lorne Buchanan's gatekeepers were reluctant to accommodate you," Jane continued. 
"I took the liberty of taking your father's name in vain since you told me the meeting was 
urgent. That did the trick. Citizen Buchanan prefers to come to you. He won't be in his 
office today." 

"I can't imagine why." 

"I've made the appointment for 1430 hours in our penthouse conference room. Citizen 
Buchanan will stay as long as need be. His security people insist on sweeping the place 
for bugs before the meeting. They want to check you out personally, too. I couldn't get 


them to budge on the stipulation." 

I laughed. "Perfectly acceptable. See that Rampart InSec returns the courtesy to El 
Queso Grande himself and his flunkies. Also, alert Karl Nazarian to expect one psy-
chotronic interrogation subject following Buchanan's meeting with me." 

"Himself?" Jane's eyes widened. 

"Yep. And I want the results before the end of the afternoon." 

"Right... The final fuel-bunker and radiation barrier modifications of your starship 
were completed last week. The survey instrumentation is installed, except for a Carnelian 
LRIR-1400J scanner that seems to be on permanent back order." 

"Tell the mechanics to find one any which way and plug it in immediately. I don't care 
if they have to steal it off a Carney dock or buy it on the goddamn black market." 

"Very well." She turned away from the phone video pickup, then returned holding a 
StelEx letterpak. "This arrived less than an hour ago, marked 'personal and confidential.' 
The sender is your friend, Captain Bermudez." 

"Would you please open it?" 

She did. "A small e-slate requiring your ID for activation. And this." 

She held up a platinum neck chain holding two gold wedding rings. 

I felt my breath catch. Mimo had been holding the rings for me ever since they were 
rescued from the stomach of a house-eating sea toad. They had belonged to me and my 
former wife, Joanna DeVet. 

I told Jane, "Please put the rings and the slate in my office safe." 

"Right. There have been more messages for you since we spoke earlier, most of them 
from the media. I gave them the standard referral to our public affairs department. 
Geraldo Gonzalez also called and said it was very important that you and he talk before 
you, urn, quote, flit off to some godforsaken boonie planet, unquote." 

Gerry chaired the Reversionist Nominating Committee, the group empowered to select 
the single Commonwealth Assembly delegate the party was newly entitled to, following 
the latest poll of CHW citizens. The committee had been deeply divided on my tentative 
candidacy, in spite of the fact that I was their principal financial resource and had also 
brought them the publicity that had finally gained the party its lone seat. However, certain 
Reverse stalwarts felt I wasn't anti-Big-Business enough to be their standard bearer. 
Others contended I was too flaky. Both points were valid. 

After reading last night's Journal, Gerry and his crew were probably scared to death 
that I'd accept the Rampart chairmanship, mutate instantly into a capitalist swine, and cut 
off all their lovely money. 

"I'll give Gonzalez half an hour. Make the appointment for 1300 in my office. 
Anything else?" 

"Bethany Frost heard you were coming in. She wants to talk to you briefly about your 
brother, Dan." 

"Rats." This I didn't need. "Maybe for a few minutes in my office, if there's time after I 
finish with Buchanan. But I'm off to meet Jake Silver around 1715. Two for dinner, just 
me for the show. Cancel the second Shakespeare ticket. Jake begged off." 

"I'll take care of it. Is there anything else you need me to arrange before you arrive? A 
limo and security escort for the restaurant and theater?" 

"Nope. I'll wear my Anonyme and take the Path just like an ordinary citizen. Media 
stalkers will never notice me in the capital crush. I'm in disguise." I held the phone at 


arm's length so she could check me out. 

I'd seen no reason to conform to Rampart Concern's dress code during my stint as 
Chief Legal Officer, since I rarely left the tower. My customary work attire of ratty jeans, 
scuffed boots, and tired western-wear shirts had scandalized Jane Nelligan sadly, 
although she never said a disapproving word. Today, however, I'd donned a 
featherweight charcoal worsted business suit with a matching silk turtleneck, a muted 
aquamarine scarf, and a silver neck brooch inset with a small nugget of turquoise. The 
only vestige of maverickhood I'd allowed myself were a pair of well-polished, low-heel, 
pointy-toed, Tony Lama cowboy boots in black mokcrok, peeking out from beneath my 
elegantly creased trousers. 

"Unbelievable," Jane murmured. "You'll certainly impress Stanislawski and 
Buchanan. If they recognize you at all." 

"Oh, they will," I said dryly. "I can guarantee that." 

I said goodbye and finished my coffee. Then I exited the ranch house through the 
kitchen, kissing Rosalia the cook on her cheek as I passed by. 

It was a beautiful Arizona morning, clear and cool, with the sun shining over Buzzard 
Roost Mesa and warblers singing their hearts out among the ponderosa pines. I heard the 
faint whinny of a horse from over by the stock barns. Maybe it was Billy, saying hasta la 
vista. 

Empty saddles in the old corral. 

Carrying a briefcase full of executive paraphernalia, I trudged down the manicured 
gravel path to the hopper pad, where my Garrison-Laguna hoppercraft waited. No pilot. I 
almost always do my own driving. It's a control thing. 

Control. 

I'd fallen asleep last night brooding about it, and when I woke my mind was firmly 
made up. It wasn't going to take me months to decide on my future—assuming I had any 
when my Haluk excursion was over. I knew for certain that I'd never again relinquish 
control of my life to any person or any institution. Not to Rampart Amalgamated 
Concern. Not to the Reversionist Party. 

The head seat at Rampart's boardroom table had never been a viable career choice for 
me. It was true that I'd be in a powerful position to advance Reversionist ideals if I 
became Rampart's chairman. Setting the agenda and having a tie-breaking vote on the 
board could significantly affect company policy. But the personal independence that had 
always been so important to me would be lost if I took Simon's place. I'd be fenced in by 
constant decision-making, forced to weigh every action and utterance because it could 
influence the lives and fortunes of billions of people, poisoned by creeping expediency, 
morphing inevitably into the kind of corporate drone I professed to despise. 

I couldn't do it. My skills were adversarial, not executive. I'd been a competent cop, a 
cunning legal strategist, and a damned fine vigilante. But I was no organization man. No 
way, no how. 

Serious politics wasn't an option, either. It was one thing to play grandstanding left-
wing firebrand as I'd done two years earlier, trumpeting radical ideas without taking 
responsibility for their implementation, happily twisting establishment tails while the 
tabloid media egged me on: Asahel Frost—another rich man with a big mouth and a bee 
in his bonnet, convinced he has the answers to the galaxy's ills! 

I still thought my answers were good ones. However, serving as the sole Assembly 


Delegate of a fledgling splinter party was simply not a practical course of action. Why, 
I'd have to learn tact and diplomacy. Legislative horsetrading. The art of graceful 
compromise. 

Me? 

Who was I kidding? Even the best and brightest Liberal Party lawmakers, such as my 
friend Sontag, endured a perpetual uphill battle in an Assembly dominated by 
Conservative creatures of the Hundred Concerns. An amateur like me didn't have a 
prayer. 

There was a more appropriate way for me to advance the Reversionist cause. I 
intended to discuss it with Gerry Gonzalez today. 

Whistling "Happy Trails to You," I climbed into my flying machine, entered the 
destination in the navigator, and let myself be whisked off to Toronto. 

—— 

You pronounce it "Trawna" unless you're a hopeless clodhopper or belong to an alien 
race, in which case you or your mechanical translator doggedly voice every vowel and 
consonent. While Torontonians snicker. 

The city was born as a native "place of meetings" where two rivers flowing into Lake 
Ontario flanked a convenient marshy plain. Scattered tribes came there to swap furs and 
copper and shell beads. It became a small French trading post in 1720, and later it was 
briefly the capital of British Canada. Waves of immigration in the nineteenth and 
twentieth centuries brought steady economic growth and a uniquely cosmopolitan 
character that made Toronto a popular choice for the United Nations' permanent 
headquarters, then for the capital of the Commonwealth of Human Worlds as the 
commercialization of the stars began. 

By the year 2236 the conurbation sprawled across 20,000 square kilometers above the 
northern shore of the lake. Its population was about seventeen million—most of them 
human. Viewed at night from space, Toronto proclaims itself with a triumphant blaze of 
light, beyond any doubt the largest and most prosperous city on the planet Earth. 

The original mosquito-plagued trading ground between the Humber and Don Rivers 
remains the city center, augmented now by scores of artificial islands out in the lake. A 
semipermeable force-umbrella 40 kilometers in diameter fends off inconvenient weather 
phenomena. Toronto's heart bristles with hundreds of multihued crystal towers crammed 
with offices and apartments, interconnected by skyways and the computerized highroad 
network. Beneath the surface streets lie rapid-transit and service subways, along with the 
unique warren of underground pedestrian walks known as the Path. 

Many of the modern buildings stand astride venerable Canadian structures that have 
been carefully preserved. Churches, grand hotels, theaters, and picturesque old shopping 
precincts and restaurants are hedged by clear piers and buttresses that support the soaring 
towers. 

Sometimes the new hovers pleasingly over the old. The massive Commonwealth 
Assembly House rises on sturdy glassy stilts above the old Ontario Parliament buildings; 
historic BCE Place is comfortably embraced by Omnivore Concern's fanciful obelisk; 
Macrodur Tower benevolently engulfs St. James Cathedral. But in other cases the overall 
effect is more ominous. Carnelian's ugly needle of beef-bouillon-colored silica glass, 
entangled in a dozen skyways, overwhelms the stately old City Hall, while the 400-story 
ithyphallic monstrosity that houses Galapharma seems on the point of crushing the 


Queen's Quay Terminal. 

Rampart Tower, only thirty-five years old and innocent of historic underpinnings, is a 
relatively modest blue-and-white skyscraper across the street from Grange Park. It is 
neither distinguished nor ugly, a mere hundred stories high, served by three vehicle 
skyways and having a hopper pad for aerial access. Before Rampart attained Concern 
status, it only occupied the top fifteen floors, leasing out the rest. The expanded firm now 
filled the entire building. God knew what would happen after the consolidation. 

The conference room where I would meet Lorne Buchanan today was a circular 
chamber at Rampart Tower's summit. My offices and the rest of the Legal Department 
occupied the ninety-sixth floor. The place I called home while I resided in the capital was 
a small clutch of rooms on the lake side of the seventy-third floor, identical to the suites 
housing transient junior executives, except for a hologram mounted over the fake 
fireplace that depicted a yellow submarine named Pernio II, chugging wistfully along the 
surface of a sapphire alien lagoon. 

I hated my Rampart Tower apartment. But I'd resisted Simon's urgings that I get 
myself a more suitable dwelling in The Beaches or one of the other upscale parts of town. 
No use bothering, I told him. I wasn't planning to stay. 

He'd never believed me. 

—— 

The sky was leaden and a combination of cold rain and sleet was falling when my 
aircraft arrived at the southern outskirts of Toronto Conurbation ATZ. I gave Traffic 
Control my destination, Macrodur Tower's upper landing shelf, and was promptly 
shunted into a holding formation over the dull green lake while computers sequenced my 
hopper—and about four dozen others—to touch down in the identical place. 

It was already quarter to twelve. I'd been delayed by a traffic-vector glitch in Chicago 
airspace. I got on the phone to warn Stanislawski's secretary that I might not be able to 
make the appointment unless I jumped the line. 

"I'll arrange priority routing," she told me. "You'll be landing in a restricted area. 
Please wait in your aircraft until a transport capsule arrives." 

Beneath the force-field, Toronto's central district was sheltered from the icy rain. But 
occasionally, vagaries of cold air-flow and high humidity conspired to produce weird 
artificial clouds under the protective roof. It was happening today. Although it was high 
noon, the fielded part of the city was sunk in heavy twilight. Swags of mist hung spookily 
around the illuminated towers and hid the tips of the loftier ones. 

The engineers at Macrodur's skyport dealt efficiently with the nuisance, clearing the 
air with infrared beacons. My hopper settled onto a sequestered pad, alphanumerics and 
transponder ID discreetly masked by security electronics from the moment I exited 
controlled airspace. Not a living soul was in sight, in spite of the fact that scores of 
aircraft were taking off and landing. 

A VIP transport capsule with one-way windows came gliding out to meet me and 
extruded a boarding tunnel that docked with the door of my hopper. A robot voice 
requested an iris scan to confirm my identity. I showed it my eyeball, then climbed in as 
instructed. 

The skyport, like the rest of the building's gold and white exterior, was exquisitely 
designed. But once inside the tower walls, the visitor was conveyed through corridors and 
anti-grav transit tubes that were uniformly mushroom-colored, blank, and claustrophobic, 


lacking any directional signs. All I saw as I sped toward Stanislawski's offices were 
anonymous carts and capsules traveling on unfathomable errands. The doors leading off 
the access platforms were unmarked, giving no hint of what lay beyond them. 

I had visited Macrodur Tower—but not the chairman's lair—numbers of times over 
the past couple of years. Worrywart financial mavens concerned about Macrodur's 
investment in Rampart periodically commanded me to explain my more bizarre tactics 
during the Galapharma trial. Sometimes Adam Stanislawski attended the interrogations; 
more often he didn't. But he had always expressed complete confidence in me, and on 
one occasion had gone out of his way to reaffirm his personal decision to grant Rampart 
the venture credit it had so desperately needed. His action had paved the way for 
Rampart's upgrade to Concern status and finally forced the hand of Galapharma's lunatic 
CEO, Alistair Drummond, contributing to his downfall. 

The Macrodur chairman's access platform was as featureless as all the others. There 
were no obvious security features guarding the great man, who admitted me to his private 
office himself. Three walls of the large room were covered with alternating strips of dark 
wood paneling and buff grass-cloth. The fourth wall, behind a vast Victorian partners 
desk, was an enormous window. Heavy drapes of dark green monk's cloth framed the 
eerie scene outside. The pictures on the walls were nonholographic, romantic terrestrial 
landscapes with the exception of a woman's portrait in oils above the green marble 
fireplace. No modern data-processing or communication equipment was in evidence, but 
I suspected that most of the antique cabinets, presses, and escritoires furnishing the room 
had been gutted and stuffed with cyber-ware. 

"Filthy day," said Adam Stanislawski. "Let's sit by the fire and have some coffee." 

He was in his mid-sixties, of stocky build, and had abundant white hair and a 
grandfatherly mustache, in defiance of alpha male corporate chic. His hyacinth-blue eyes 
were small, alive with intelligence, humor, and fuck-not-with-me authority. 

"Thank you for seeing me, sir," I said, taking a designated chair. Adam is one of the 
few persons I know who naturally rates an honorific. 

"My pleasure, Helly. I believe you take your coffee black these days." He handed me a 
plain stoneware cup of steaming brew. 

For the sake of politeness I took a sip. "I won't waste your time with preliminaries. 
You're aware that my father has proposed me to succeed him as Rampart's chairman. I'd 
like to know what you think of the idea." 

Adam Stanislawski snapped the ball back to me without hesitation. "It sucks. Like the 
Great Sagittarian Mother of All Black Holes." 

I burst out laughing. "Would you care to elaborate?" 

"The chairman of an Amalgamated Concern is responsible for the long-term direction 
of the firm. He or she must have a coherent vision of the firm's future. But having a 
vision isn't enough. A successful chairman needs the force of character to make that 
vision a reality." 

Zing! A perfect gut-shot. I started to speak, but he held up a hand and forged on. 

"You'd like to steer Rampart hi a completely new direction, beginning immediately. 
That won't work. I'm not saying your dream of Insap small-stakeholdership is foolish or 
impossible. Only that it's premature and currently inappropriate. Marrying Rampart and 
Galapharma is going to be godawfully difficult. The new Concern will not merely be the 
sum of the parts of the previous two. The transition requires a generalissimo who can 


identify and encourage those executives who'll be the most effective leaders for the 
future. He'll have to scrutinize every major project and decide whether it should be 
retained, modified, or discarded. Rampart's new chairman will have to be a hard-nosed 
evaluator. Even a hatchetman. This is not a job for"—he smiled good-humoredly—"a 
spontaneous paladin." 

"Or a rogue cowboy," I said, drinking more coffee. 

"You're both of those things, Helly Frost. Someday in the far distant future you might 
make a good Rampart Chairman of the Board. But not now." 

"Not ever," I said. 

"Have you ever thought of becoming Rampart's syndic? I should think that job would 
suit your talents rather well." 

The Corporate Syndic was a glorified lobbyist, the principal liaison between a 
Concern or Starcorp and the Commonwealth Assembly. At present, my cousin Zared 
Frost held the position, in addition to that of Chief Operating Officer. The latter job took 
most of his attention, and also required his residency on the planet Seriphos in the 
Perseus Spur. He was a competent syndic, but an unspectacular one. 

"The idea's interesting," I told Stanislawski. "The position certainly has more appeal to 
me than the chairmanship. But perhaps Simon would be a better choice, given his long 
years of experience." 

The Macrodur chairman shook his head. "Your father's day is done. When Rampart 
consolidates with Galapharma, your corporate syndic will have to be a vigorous person, 
able to stand up to the pressures of capital politics. Think about it seriously, Helly." 

I smiled noncommitally. "I will. But right now I'd like to know who you think would 
make the best chairman for Rampart." 

Without hesitation Adam Stanislawski said, "Gunter Eckert, your Chief Financial 
Officer. He's a founding stakeholder and one of the best intellects on the Rampart team. I 
know he doesn't want the job. But he'll take it and do it well. I'd like our director, John 
Ellington, to be vice chairman, a close adviser to Gunter without additional voting 
authority. The two of them, working with your older sister, will keep the reorganized 
Concern on track. If you like, I'll pass on my considered opinion to Simon and Eve." 

The "opinion" of the 400-kilo gorilla. 

"I'd appreciate it if you would, sir." 

Adam Stanislawski rose from his chair. Taking the cue, I did, too, figuring that our 
short meeting was over. I felt relieved and vindicated. Better get one thing straight, 
however. 

"I don't plan to give up my Rampart directorship," I said. "Or my notion to apply 
Reversionist principles to the Concern's relations with nonstargoing Insaps. Even if I 
don't become Corporate Syndic, I intend to exert continuous pressure on the other 
directors. Rampart is going to initiate experimental programs on suitable worlds where 
fuller Insap economic participation is most feasible." 

"Good! I'll be watching with interest." He shot me an oblique look. We hadn't started 
for the door yet. "And I'll keep an eye on your other activities, too." 

"My financial support of the Reversionist party will continue, but I'm no longer 
interested in becoming an Assembly Delegate." 

"That's not the kind of activity I was referring to." 

Uh-oh... 


Adam Stanislawski went to the window. The view was stupendous, a forest of jewel-
bright spires glittering with countless points of light, the arching high roads and their 
streaming traffic, controlled swarms of aircraft—the whole wrapped in glowing bands of 
mist. 

"I have the reputation of being a straight-arrow," the Macrodur chairman said. 
"Galapharma's vicious raid on Rampart bugged the hell out of me. So when your sister 
Eve proposed her venture-credit arrangement, I was receptive. Helping a feisty little 
outfit poke a sharp stick in Alistair Drummond's greedy eye sounded like a great idea. 
But I'm a practical businessman, too. Macrodur never would have taken a stake in 
Rampart unless I'd been convinced that the investment was a good one. The deciding 
factor was the potentially huge Haluk market for your genen vector, PD32:C2." 

"I realize that." 

"I've heard that you have a private vendetta against the Haluk. That you're looking for 
a way to discredit them and abrogate the new treaties. Is it true?" 

"I believe that the Haluk can't be trusted, and that our treaties with them are severely 
flawed—especially since there's no provision for close human inspection of their planets. 
The Haluk almost certainly have a severe overpopulation problem in their star-cluster 
that's being made worse by eradication of their allomorphism. The severity of the 
problem deserves investigation." 

"Ah." A restrained nod. 

"The only recourse the aliens have is to move into the Milky Way," I went on. "To do 
that without destroying their economy, they need our advanced starship technology, as 
well as human expertise in other scientific areas. If the Haluk were content to migrate to 
our galaxy in a peaceful and civilized manner, there'd be no problem. My personal 
experience with them suggests they'd prefer a more drastic solution to their predicament." 

"But you have no concrete proof of hostile intent." 

"I have presumptive evidence. It's kept under conditions of the most stringent security 
by Assembly Delegate Efrem Sontag, an old friend of mine from Harvard Law School. I 
hope to obtain more proof, working very discreetly as a private citizen. I have a certain 
talent for clandestine operations. Since no one else seems interested in analyzing Haluk 
ways and means, I'm taking on the job by default." 

"I see. Let me be frank, then. Macrodur and its affiliates will never do anything to 
impede your investigations—provided you keep me personally informed of verifiable 
dangers to the Commonwealth." 

Well, who'da thunk it! 

"You surprise me," I said evenly. 

"If you knew me better, Helly, perhaps you wouldn't be surprised. But don't assume 
that other Concerns share my point of view. If you are seen to openly endanger the new 
trade treaty, you risk lethal retaliation. Most specifically, from agents of Carnelian and 
Sheltok, the Concerns that have the most to lose." 

"I understand." 

"I wonder if you do, entirely." Stanislawski was staring out the window with his hands 
clasped behind his back. "The ultraheavy transactinide elements vital to antimatter fuels 
and other high-energy applications are devilishly difficult to obtain. For the most part, 
they're found on R-class Sagittarian worlds—appalling planets in recurrent-nova systems 
where humans can't survive, even in full armor. Mining these elements robotically from 


orbit is becoming increasingly expensive, as the more accessible lodes are worked out. 
And now, suddenly, a new source of these crucial energy products has unexpectedly 
opened up. By some astrophysical fluke, the Haluk Cluster is also rich in the ultraheavies, 
perhaps because it's a tiny captive galaxy rather than a true satellite of the Milky Way. 
So, in a certain sense, the Haluk have us over a barrel." 

"A nice metaphor," I remarked cynically, "that most people take care not to examine 
too closely." 

"I won't belabor the point." Stanislawski took me gently by the elbow and steered me 
toward the door. "The Haluk trade treaty with humanity is mutually beneficial. 
Antimatter energy is vital to the continuing growth of interstellar commerce. Remember 
that." 

"I'm not a loose cannon, Adam," I said softly. "Just an ex-cop who can't resist 
analyzing evidence when it's shoved into my face." 

"I appreciate that. Which is why I won't stop you from gathering more of that 
evidence." His blue eyes twinkled benignly. "You do realize that if I wanted to stop you, 
I would. Decisively." 

"Oh, yeah." 

He opened the door for me. A transport capsule waited. "You know, Helly, thus far in 
our exploitation of the stars, we've been very lucky. We've never come up against an 
alien race with the inclination and the capability to successfully wage war on us. That 
good luck has made us complacent. Complacency is bad policy—for a business, and for a 
government." He shook my hand. "It was good to talk to you ... Let me know what Barky 
Tregarth has to say, if you find him." He stepped back and the featureless door slid shut, 
leaving me alone on the platform with my wild surmise. 

—— 

Geraldo Gonzalez met with me in my office at Rampart Tower and went away doubly 
relieved when I told him I would continue my lavish funding of the Reversionist party 
and promotion of its ideals, while not demanding the Assembly seat in return. I wasn't 
surprised when he admitted that the Nominating Committee preferred him for the new 
post. 

I strongly advised Gerry against squandering our lone vote in futile causes. He said I 
was a fine one to talk. We parted amiably, after agreeing that I deserved a long holiday, 
untroubled by political hassles. 

When he was gone I opened my office's wall safe and took out the slim StelEx 
package from Mimo Bermudez that I had not yet had time to examine. I tipped out the 
encrypted slate and the two plain gold wedding bands on their chain. The larger ring fit 
exactly over the small one. The fact that I'd kept them had convinced both my big sister, 
Eve, and Matilde Gregoire, a woman I'd once asked to live with me, that I was still in 
love with my former wife. 

I'd denied it. But it was I who had divorced Joanna DeVet following my frame-up and 
criminal conviction, even though she had been willing to share my exile in the Perseus 
Spur. Crushing humiliation and despair made it impossible for me to accept her sacrifice. 

Joanna had never remarried. She was still a professor of political science, teaching at 
the central campus of Commonwealth University only a few blocks north of Rampart 
Tower. It might as well have been 14,000 light-years. 

Eve, wed only to her job but a soppy sentimentalist all the same, had urged me again 


and again to call Joanna. But I could not bring myself to do it, any more than I could 
analyze the reason why. 

Setting the rings aside, I opened Mimo's slate. The letter on the small screen was what 
I half expected. My friend had sent me a copy of his last will and testament. Since I was 
due to go to the meeting with Lorne Buchanan in just a few minutes, I only scanned the 
document briefly. The principal legatees were the schools and hospital of Kedge-
Lockaby's Big Beach continent, which would receive his substantial fortune in semi-ill-
gotten gains. 

But Mimo had left his beautiful bungalow on Eyebrow Cay to me, along with the rest 
of the island. 

—— 

Lorne Buchanan and I, our bodies certified to harbor no nano-eavesdropping devices, 
met alone in the equally bug-free premises of the spacious Rampart conference room. We 
quickly came to an agreement that was mutually gratifying. 

He was a young man, only in his mid-forties. His build was athletic, his brow clear 
and wide, his jaw forthright and spade-shaped, and his manner confident. Only the 
smallest whiff of fear lurking in his deeply shadowed eyes acknowledged the fatal 
quagmire that now threatened to pull him under. He had been Gala's Chief Operating 
Officer before becoming CEO upon the death of Alistair Drummond. He was a doer, not 
a schemer, whose Concern responsibilities had principally involved overseeing 
commodity production on the thousands of Gala worlds in the Orion Arm. 

Lorne Buchanan swore to me—offering to confirm the fact by submitting to the truth 
machines—that he had had no direct involvement either in Gala's illegal Haluk adventure 
or in the dirty tricks of the Rampart takeover conspiracy. He claimed to have advised 
Drummond against a Haluk alliance from the time the scheme was first broached. 
Buchanan stopped short of calling his former boss a stone nutcase, but the inference was 
there. Other members of the Galapharma board, he said, were furious and frightened at 
the mess Drummond had gotten them into. After Drummond's violent demise, the board 
had elected Buchanan in a vain hope of salvaging the situation. 

When I dangled my deal, Lorne Buchanan swallowed it hook, line, and sinker. He 
readily agreed to affirm the agreement by undergoing psychotronic interrogation by my 
trusted associate, Karl Nazarian, before leaving Rampart Tower. 

I wanted truthful answers from him to the following questions: 

—— 

1. Are you a Haluk demiclone? Can you identify any demiclones now working in 
Galapharma AC? 

2. Are you willing to obtain and hand over to Delegate Efrem Sontag all 
information pertaining to the allomorph trait eradication and demiclone 
procedures developed by Galapharma for the Haluk, including details and 
locations of all clandestine demiclone labs that were or are now in operation, 
plus the total number of human-Haluk demiclones produced there? 

3. Are you willing to obtain and hand over to Delegate Son-tag the secret genetic 
marker identifying a Haluk-human demiclone? 

4. Are you willing to obtain and hand over to Delegate Son-tag all information 
available on the supervision of Haluk demiclone labs by Galapharma Security 
personnel? 


5. Are you willing to ensure that Delegate Sontag alone, and no other person, 
government agency, corporation, or media data retrieval system gains access to 
this information—preferably by destroying all traces of it personally? 

—— 

Lorne Buchanan declared emphatically that he was not a Haluk ringer, nor did he 
know anyone else who was. As I had suspected, the "sealed" data concerning the Haluk 
still resided in Galapharma's computers under heavy encryption. He was certain he could 
obtain everything I requested, send it to Sontag, and obliterate all traces of it from the 
Gala database. 

In return I agreed to give him a document carrying my personal iridographic seal, 
stating that Rampart would not cooperate in any criminal prosecution against him or 
designated close associates. Furthermore, we would hire him as Assistant Chief 
Operating Officer in the consolidated Concern, and continue his employment for a 
minimum period of ten years or until he chose to vacate the position. 

Jane Nelligan brought the document to the conference room. Buchanan and I 
eyeballed it. The Gala CEO zapped a copy to his personal attorney and I sent others to the 
offices of Simon, Eve, and Efrem Sontag. Then I handed Jane the questions for Karl 
Nazarian and she courteously escorted the visitor away to the torture chamber. 

Lorne Buchanan would fulfill his promises scrupulously. Sadly, he would not live 
long enough enjoy the perks of the trade-off. There was another question I should have 
added to that list of his: 

—— 

6. To the best of your knowledge, is Alistair Drummond dead? 

—— 

"Helly! Felicitations on winning the Galapharma verdict!" 

"Thanks, Ef." 

"I presume you want me to forego wisecracks about your loony-tune interview in the 
Wall Street Journal." 

"I spoke from my heart of hearts," I retorted, "and shot from the hip. As the king said, 
Honi soft qui merde y pense." 

"That's mal ypense." 

"It's all shit to me, pal... For your information, I have declined the Rampart 
chairmanship. Neither will I seek a seat in the Assembly. Gerry Gonzalez will hoist high 
the banner of Reversionism among you and your colleagues. Be kind to him." 

I had reached my friend Sontag in his hopper. He was flying home alone to his home 
on Lake Simcoe following the early Friday adjournment of the Assembly. After he had 
secured our call with Phase XII encryption, I filled him in on details of the deal I had 
struck with Lorne Buchanan. 

Ef was cautiously enthusiastic. "If Buchanan comes through with everything he 
promised, we'll end up with enough solid data to finally make a presentation to my 
committee. Then the matter can be opened to debate on the Assembly floor. Perhaps I can 
even force a special review of the no-inspection clause of the nonaggression pact. The 
existence of sizable human-Haluk demiclone factories alone is prima facie evidence of 
some sort of questionable intent by the aliens. During the treaty talks, the Haluk Servant 
of Servants maintained that only a handful of human transforms had been created. As I 
recall, his explanation was ingenious but not very plausible from a human point of view. 


"The fakes were supposedly going to serve as some sort of goodwill envoys on Haluk 
planets in their star-cluster, where we humans are viewed as big bad boogymen. The 
Haluk fed that ridiculous story to Galapharma to get the demiclone project going in the 
first place. I'm sure Alistair Drummond didn't believe a word of it. But it was expedient 
for him to accept it, just as it was expedient for Concern-connected bureaucrats in 
Xenoaffairs and Interstellar Commerce to do the same when they drew up the treaties." 

We briefly discussed legal aspects of Buchanan's material—mostly ways our political 
enemies might attempt to discredit it. Then I told Ef my plan for pumping Barky Tregarth 
about life in the Haluk Cluster—provided I could locate the old Throwaway. I said 
nothing about going extragalactic myself, but Mama Sontag didn't raise any dummies. 

"I like the idea of checking out Haluk demographics through an informant," he said. 
"Even if he's disenfranchised, his deposition sub duritia would be admissible if it pertains 
to the security of the Commonwealth. Ask Tregarth about the Haluk military-industrial 
capability. Ask him for details of their production of transactinides. But don't even think 
about buzzing off to the Haluk Cluster yourself to verify Barky's story." 

I started to deny I had any such notion, but he cut me off. 

"Don't try to bullshit me, Helly. A snoop job like that would violate the nonaggression 
pact. I wouldn't be able to use any evidence you gathered." 

"Not in a formal Assembly inquiry, perhaps. But it could still be useful poop for you 
to leak to the media, sway public opinion, pressure the other Delegates—" 

"I can't be seen to condone your breaking Commonwealth law." 

"Not even the asinine ones? I can tell the difference, you know. I'm a Juris Doctor 
from Harvard, just like you." 

He shook his head wearily. I was testing his patience with my lame humor. "And I'm a 
politician with a certain reputation for probity, working in a government almost entirely 
under the control of galactic Big Business. The public respects my integrity, and so do 
the media. My square-shooter image is the source of my power and I can't do anything to 
endanger it. Why do you think I've been so cautious about waiting for the appropriate 
time to present the evidence you've already gathered? Two years ago you weren't a 
credible source. Today, by some miracle, you very nearly are ... unless you fuck yourself, 
pulling some idiotic stunt." 

Ouch. "Can we at least agree that you'll hold off asking your big question on the 
Assembly floor until I question Barky Tregarth?" 

"You don't know how long it will take to find him. And what if the man's a washout?" 

I just had to give it one last try. "Look. A quick survey of selected Haluk Cluster 
worlds would take me ten weeks maximum. I've got the ship and the equipment, and I 
can do the job. Ten weeks, Ef! I could release the information to the media anonymously. 
Sure, the Haluk and the consortium will suspect that I'm the secret source—but so what? 
They won't be able to prove anything." 

"Helly, the Assembly is on the verge of approving the sale of fifty more Rampart 
Mandate T-2 worlds to the Haluk. It'll happen in June, just before summer recess. Less 
than eight weeks from now." 

I voiced a heart-felt "Fuck!" No one at Rampart Tower had said a word to me about 
this. 

"It gets worse. A new bill that would let the aliens buy three hundred more Rampart 
worlds will come out of committee and be put to a vote shortly after the new session 


begins in late August. All of the Conservatives and many of the incoming new Liberals 
will vote for it. There's been a tremendous push from Sheltok and Bodascon and the other 
consortium members to give these additional Haluk colonies the green light. The only 
chance I have of preventing the bill's passage is by preventing its introduction: killing it 
in committee. To do that we've got to ignite a firestorm of public opinion on the PlaNet 
that even the most venal Delegates can't ignore." 

"Can you kill the fifty-planet giveaway?" 

"Impossible. It would be terrible strategy to open the Haluk inquiry just before the 
summer recess. We have to concentrate all our efforts on scuppering the second bill. 
Ideally, the evidence should be placed before my Xeno Oversight Committee when the 
Assembly reconvenes. And you should be prepared to testify personally. We won't use 
psychotronic interrogation on witnesses before the committee—but it may be necessary 
when the inquiry moves to the Assembly floor." 

"I understand." 

Efrem Sontag and I stared at each other in silence. We were the same age but he 
looked ten years older. The image on my office communicator showed a slightly built 
unhandsome man with lank dark hair, oversized ears, and the scorching eyes of an 
indomitable fighter. In spite of his membership in the principal minority party, he was 
one of the most powerful Assembly Delegates, a true untouchable, the scourge of fellow 
legislators who dwelt cozily in the pockets of the Hundred Concerns. 

The inquiry he was about to orchestrate would touch off one of the biggest political 
rows in the history of the Commonwealth. While the Concerns screamed bloody murder 
at the prospect of Haluk trade disruption, the tabloid media would joyfully fan the flames 
of controversy. We hoped that the Commonwealth citizenry would be sufficiently 
alarmed at the notion of Haluk doppelganger spies that they would pressure their 
Delegates interactively over the PlaNet, overriding the influence of the Concerns and 
forcing a review of the dubious treaties. 

And what would the Haluk do then, poor things? Cave in, confess all, permit full 
inspection of their worlds, and promise to behave in the future if we let them continue to 
colonize the Milky Way? 

Maybe. If the heat was turned high enough. 

I said, "It's in your hands now, Ef. I have a few reliable people who've worked with 
me that I'd like you to consider taking on board. People with reputations above reproach 
like Karl Nazarian, and Beatrice Mangan of the ICS Forensic Division." 

"I'd welcome their help." 

"I'll do my best to get Barky Tregarth's deposition for you quickly. Meanwhile, take 
very good care of yourself, old buddy." 

Sontag uttered a brief laugh that had no humor in it. "The Concerns wouldn't dare send 
their thugs after me." 

"I'm not worried about the Concerns. The problem could be Haluk demiclones 
operating right here in Toronto. Fake humans." 

He gazed at me for a moment in shocked silence. "Are you serious?" 

"Dead serious. I've met a few who were masquerading as Galapharma Security 
personnel. They were extremely convincing. The Haluk are at least as intelligent as we 
are. And they have a really steep learning curve." 

His expression remained neutral, but I knew he was finding it hard to believe that a 


disguised alien entity could successfully pose as a human being over a significant period 
of time. 

I said, "One of the most important pieces of data we're supposed to obtain from Lorne 
Buchanan is the gene market that identifies demiclones. Pass that information on to Bea 
Mangan as soon as possible. Then get her to secretly test all of your close associates for 
creeping Halukitis." I hesitated, hating to say what had to come next. "And test Liliane, 
too." 

Sontag exclaimed, "Are you out of your mind, Helly?" 

"All you need for a proper DNA assay is a snotty Kleenex or a hair with a live follicle. 
Neither your wife nor your staff people have to know they're being checked out. Dammit, 
Ef, the demiclone moles are out there! I'm sure of it. The Haluk ringers who penetrated 
Gala Security are probably long gone, but there have to be others holed up for the long 
haul." 

"I'll get on it," he said grimly. "God—you really know how to spoil a man's day." 

"Think how useful it would be to our case," I said, "if you found Haluk spies in 
sensitive government positions." 

"Useful!" He made a face. 

"I'll talk to you again as soon as I know anything useful." 

"Have a safe Barky Hunt," he said. 

"You keep safe, too, Ef. No joke." 

"I know." He ended the call. 

I sat quietly at my desk for some time after that, alone in my familiar messy office 
with suitcoat, vest, and neck scarf discarded. Running over the events of the afternoon. 
Feeling both drained and exhilarated at what I'd accomplished in a few brief hours. 

It was almost as good as lying on a tropical beach on far Kedge-Lockaby. 

My desk clock said 16:42. In less than an hour I'd be meeting Jake Silver. Should I put 
off my younger sister, Beth, or do my family duty? 

Maybe she hadn't shown up. 

I touched the intercom. "Jane, did Lorne Buchanan finish his psychotronic session 
with Karl Nazarian?" 

"It went very well. All responses were positive and there was very little discomfort 
because of the cooperative mindset of the subject. Citizen Buchanan left the tower about 
ten minutes ago with his entourage. He asked me to tell you that the requisite data will be 
transferred to Delegate Sontag's office immediately under conditions of strictest 
security." 

"Outstanding. Um ... do I have anyone waiting in reception?" 

"Your sister Bethany has been here for over two hours," Jane said, with a hint of 
reproach. "I informed her that a meeting today might not be possible, but you would do 
your best to see her." 

Rats. 

"Send her in, please." 

Rising from the desk, I opened the door to my seldom-used clothes closet to expose 
the full-length mirror and began reknotting my scarf. 

Beth wafted in. "Good afternoon, Asa." Her voice was almost inaudible, a bad sign. 
The quieter she spoke, the more pissed off she was likely to be. 

"Please sit down," I said. "Forgive me spiffying myself up. I have to rush out of here 


in a few minutes for an urgent appointment." 

"It's quite all right." She refused my offer of coffee and sat silently for several minutes 
while I finished dressing. 

Bethany Frost was wearing a smart walking suit of teal silk tweed with shimmering 
greenish highlights. Dark blue ankleboots, a matching handbag, and a choker of heavy 
gold links inset with a myriad of tiny diamonds completed the ensemble. As always, in 
spite of her high-fashion clothes, she managed to look ephemeral, like some delicate 
butterfly that the slightest breath of wind would crumple. Beth is not as petite as Eve, but 
like her, has the fine bone structure and fair coloring of our late mother, Katje 
Vanderpost. 

I call Beth my little sister because she was born seven years after Eve and has always 
looked more youthful than her years. She is actually two years older than I. Her intellect 
is sharp as a scalpel, with a mathematical bent, but her emotional temperament is 
unstable. For nearly ten years she served Rampart as its Assistant Chief Financial Officer 
under Gunter Eckert, until our brother Daniel's fall from grace drove her to a nervous 
breakdown and she retired from the business world. She and her husband, a cybernetic 
researcher named Carter Berg, and two teenage children. 

Beth and I were never particularly affectionate toward one another. When we were 
small children, she and I were rivals for the quasimateraal attentions of Big Sister Eve, 
who for some reason enjoyed the company of a brash baby buckaroo rather than Beth's 
tiresome coy brilliance. Beth retaliated by bestowing her sibling loyalty on Daniel, two 
years Eve's senior. In adulthood the brother and sister remained very close. 

When I refused to join Rampart after finishing law school, Beth concluded that I was a 
traitor to the family. She had always believed me guilty of the trumped-up charges that 
destroyed my career in the Interstellar Commerce Secretariat. During Galapharma's rough 
wooing of Rampart, she had sided with those who favored a sellout. 

Beth remained stubbornly convinced of Dan's innocence, in spite of all Eve and I had 
done to prove that our brother was a secret collaborator in Alistair Drummond's 
conspiracy and directly responsible for our mother's death. 

I went back to my desk and we stared at each other without speaking. It was an old 
ploy of Beth's to put one on the defensive. Her huge blue eyes were full of unshed tears, 
but with the tyranny of the meek, she waited me out until I was forced to break the 
silence. 

"What can I do for you, sis?" 

She whispered, "Let Dan go." 

"That's not possible." 

"It's killing him, Asa—penned up like a dog in that damned wilderness lodge up in the 
Kenora! Snow on the ground six months of the year, nothing but moose and mosquitoes 
and loons the rest of the time. And that filthy medication the InSec people use to keep 
him docile ... Dan can't hurt anyone. Let him go home to Norma and Jamie." 

"Norma sees Dan every weekend. Jamie could visit his father if he chose to." But he 
didn't. My nephew, a busy young microsurgeon, was convinced of his father's guilt and 
made only rare trips to isolated Kingfisher Lodge in the far northern reaches of Ontario. 

Norma Palmer, Dan's wife, a long-time Conservative party Delegate in the Assembly, 
was a more enigmatic figure. She had always kept aloof from the rest of the family, and 
now used her political influence to keep the media away from her luckless husband. It 


was plain that Norma still loved Dan, doubtful that she would have approved her sister-
in-law's desire to set him free. 

"The trial's over," Beth persisted. "The tabloid hacks will back off once consolidation 
of Rampart and Galapharma begins and find other fish to fry. Let Dan come back to 
Toronto and have a normal human existence. He promises to live very quietly, without 
rocking your precious Rampart boat." 

"It's impossible." 

"Why?" she whispered ominously. "Because you and Eve say so?" 

"Because of what Dan did. The way he colluded with Alistair Drummond's criminal 
tactics during the takeover fight. Our brother is a crook, Beth. He could sabotage the 
consolidation. By rights, he should be facing criminal prosecution." 

"Alistair Drummond lied to Dan! The merger tactics were never supposed to involve 
illegal activity. It was to be strictly business, with only a little computer snooping to 
smooth the way. Dan knew nothing about the sabotage, Qiu's death, Eve's kidnapping, 
any of that. And he swears that he never did anything to harm our poor mother. I believe 
him." 

"Then let him tell his story to the machines," I said coldly, "and see if they do." 

"You know those horrible devices can cause brain damage! When you were on trial 
for malfeasance, your lawyer wouldn't let you submit to them. Why should Dan?" 

"We've been over this before. The reason Dan won't undergo psychoprobing is 
because he's guilty. For the love of God, Beth—he confessed to Simon and me while he 
was flying us to Coventry Blue at gunpoint! He extorted our voting proxies from us by 
threatening to have us transmuted into alien sex slaves!" 

"That's absurd," she said. "That story is so ridiculous not even a child would believe it. 
Dan convinced you two that there was nothing further to be gained by opposing the 
Galapharma merger. You and Simon gave him your proxies willingly, then you reneged 
and came storming down to the Sky Ranch because—" 

"That's not true. Dan's lying, manipulating you." 

"Asa, he's our brother. A good husband and father. A man who worked faithfully for 
Rampart for over twenty years, making it strong." 

"Who sold out when Pop wouldn't appoint him CEO." I rose from my seat. "I'm sorry, 
Beth. I know you love Dan, but he's a dangerous man—perhaps as crazy as Drummond 
himself. The proof that he had our mother killed is overwhelming. But Dan shows 
absolutely no remorse, only denial. We've done the best we can for him, under the 
circumstances." 

"Is that your final decision?" 

"Mine, Simon's, and Eve's. Now I'm afraid I have to leave. And so do you." 

I crossed to the closet and got my Anonyme anorak, a garment esteemed by shy 
skulkers such as minor celebs, unfaithful spouses, and urban misanthropes. The thing is 
available in a several fashion colors. Its privacy-field visor is guaranteed to be proof 
against any scanner. My anorak even boasted a special feature, a comfy light armor 
lining—not that I needed that kind of protection anymore. With Alistair Drummond 
presumably gone where the goblins go, and the Haluk still unaware of my plan to cramp 
their style, no one had a motive to whack me. My greatest enemies nowadays were media 
busybodies. 

I slipped the anorak on, drew up the open hood, and flicked the switch. Presto! No 


face. The tiny force-field is unnoticeable to the wearer. You can even eat and drink 
through it—although I didn't intend to insult Carman's mouth-watering menu by doing so. 

Beth remained in her chair, posed as rigidly as a statue. Her voice was still low-
pitched and calm, but tears coursed down her cheeks, ruining her flawless makeup. 

"All Dan wanted was the best for Rampart. He was deceived. He would have made a 
wonderful CEO, but our father chose Eve instead. His precious pet! Simon is an arrogant, 
misguided fool. And you, Asa ... you're—" 

I opened the office door. Jane Nelligan was at her desk. 

"Please see that my sister Beth gets safely home," I said. "It would be best if you can 
contact Dr. Berg and advise him that his wife is feeling upset and needs him. Failing that, 
have one of the InSec officers take her home in a hopper." I lowered my voice. "Make a 
note. Her visitation rights and phone access to Daniel Frost are suspended until Eve or I 
say otherwise. And now I'm outta here." 

"Bastard!" Beth screamed. "You fucking heartless bastard!" 

My sister's furious shouts continued as I hurried to the bank of ordinary inertialess 
elevators that serve Rampart Tower and descended to the underground thoroughfare 
called the Path. 


Chapter 4 

 

The force-umbrella sheltering the capital is proof against high wind and precipitation, 
but it doesn't modify the ambient air temperature or humidity. So millions of office 
workers, junior execs, bureaucrats, and other downtowners seeking to avoid chilly or 
overly hot weather walk from place to place along an extensive system of subterranean 
concourses that has been a Toronto fixture for over 250 years. 

The Path connects rapid transit subway stations with every commercial and 
government tower in the central core. Its multiple levels comprise a virtual underground 
city of bright tunnels having sections of moving walkway, shopping malls, and jogging 
lanes. The Path's busier corridors are lined with fast-food eateries, amusement arcades, 
and service establishments. There are even miniature parks where flowers and trees grow 
under artificial light, fountains contribute beneficial neg-ions, and the city's famous black 
squirrels cadge handouts from people having lunch on patches of grass. Nothing with 
wheels or antigrav lifts—except city cops on bicycles and the personal powerscooters of 
the disabled—is allowed in the Path's pedestrian-friendly network. It invites those 
interested in a casual stroll as well as bustling, single-minded commuters. 

The Path has its own folklore, too. Certain little-traveled parts of the system to the 
north are alleged to be haunted by the ghosts of Thrown Away panhandlers and 
unlicensed vendors, cleared out in a pitiless sweep thirty years ago. A mazelike area near 
the university subway station is fraught with urban legends of suicidal lovers, a berserk 
sweeper bot that attempts to suck up the unwary, and the Headless Professor—behind 
whose privacy visor lies nothing. The lowest levels, shut off behind locked access 
hatches, are a labyrinth of disused shopping corridors dating from the previous century, 
old service tunnels, ancient sewers, and modern storm drains. They supposedly form a 
Dark Path frequented by the lawless, the desperately poor, and uncountable hordes of 
giant rats. 

During my recent term of legal servitude, I would sometimes take a break and hike 
long distances in Underground Toronto. I enjoyed the infectious vitality of the Path and 
the human diversity of its denizens. Some of them walked shrouded in anonymity, as I 
always did; but the majority went about their business with the boisterous self-confidence 
of a youthful elite fortunate to have good jobs in the most exciting city on Earth. 

Fair numbers of aliens mingled with humanity on the Path. The city center had 
embassies for four of the five star-going Insap races. (The grotesque Kalleyni, who found 
Earth gravity oppressive, kept a legation at Luna Landing— a fortunate thing for human 
dignity, since they were such appalling practical jokers.) A stroller on the Path might 
expect to encounter towering Joru in elegant black-and-white habits, irascible little Qastt, 
pale Y'tata under strict orders from their protocol people to take their charcoal pills and 
an-tiflatulence medication, and—most numerous of all—the Haluk. They had flocked to 
the human capital in droves after the signing of the treaties. Their blue-skinned trade 
attaches lobbied relentlessly in the halls of government, and their commercial reps 
infested the executive suites of half the Hundred Concerns, wheeling and dealing. 

The Haluk were the only aliens who adopted human clothing during their Earth 
sojourn. I had never been able to get used to the sight of them, striding boldly through the 
underground thoroughfares, always in groups of three or more, dressed in expensive 
high-style outfits. Members of the Joru, Y'tata, and Qastt races lived in apartments 


scattered throughout the central city; but all of the Haluk resided in their embassy, which 
comprised the top two-thirds of the enormous Macpherson Tower on Edward Street, just 
across from the headquarters of Sheltok, the Big Seven energy Concern. 

Like the restricted Haluk planets, their embassy was strictly off limits to humanity. 

—— 

Thanks to my sister Beth, I was late for my meeting with Chief Superintendent Jake 
Silver. 

I took the McCaul Street leg of the Path north to the edge of the university campus, 
then turned east beneath the teeming government area until I reached CCID Tower on 
College Street. An escalator brought me into the historic lobby, which is part of the 
original Toronto police headquarters. I found Jake fidgeting and glaring at his wrist 
chronometer. He was wearing a natty camel-colored overcoat and a black beret. 

I sidled up to him and deactivated my visor. "Yikes! The fuzz!" 

He gave me a dirty look. "It's about time. You know what happens to people who 
come late for a reservation at Carman's? Come on. We'll save time walking outside." 

He strode through the front doors, with me trailing apologetically after. I turned my 
privacy visor back on. "Don't get all in a snit, Jake. They won't throw you out of the place 
if you're with me. I'm a star! Rich, too." 

"Wiseass. When was the last time you had dinner at Carman's?" 

"Recently," I prevaricated. But I actually hadn't been there for over two years, back 
when I was still a political wannabe, wining and dining Liberal party Delegates 
sympathetic to Reverse notions, hoping they would allow me to address their open 
committee sessions and badmouth the Haluk. 

"Did you get a line on Barky Tregarth?" I inquired. 

"I'll answer that," Jake said, "when I have a tumbler of Clynelish scotch in my fist and 
my steak is smiling up at me. You better pray that the maitre d' is in one of his good 
moods." 

"Is Albert still there?" 

"He is. And merciless to the tardy." 

The restaurant was only a couple of blocks away, on Alexander Street. Damp cold 
struck through my anorak, making me wish the garment had environmental controls 
instead of armor. April can really be the cruelest month in middle North America. Down 
on the Path, daffodils and tulips were in exuberant bloom. Aboveground, it still felt like 
winter. 

Jake and I charged along the crowded sidewalk without speaking until the traffic 
signal at Yonge Street caught us. VIP cars and taxis were in a state of gridlock, as usual, 
waiting to get onto the computerized high-road ramps. The City Council's latest proposal 
to ban private ground vehicles from central-core streets had once again been shot down 
by the Hundred Concerns. 

"Have a hard day, Chief Superintendent?" I asked Jake neutrally. 

"The usual. Squabbling with a Zone Patrol liaison, chewing out the idiot droids in 
Data Processing, accepting shit with a smile from the powers that be." He paused. "And 
renewing an old and very unsavory acquaintance, thanks to you. I got what you wanted, 
but you're probably not going to like it." 

He didn't say another word until we reached the 275-year-old steak house. We were 
twenty minutes late, but Albert's austere face lost its scowl as I hove into view, shucking 


my anorak. An attendant took it and Jake's overcoat. 

"Helly!" The maitre d' beamed at me. According to Rampart's standard operating 
procedure, Jane Nelligan had booked the table in the Concern's name, not my own. 
"Welcome back! I was afraid you'd forgotten us." 

"Never. I've just been working my butt to the bone, forced to live on junk food." 

Albert nodded. "The trial of the century! Your name is on everyone's lips." 

Everyone who reads the Wall Street Journal, anyhow. I gave a wry smile as I slipped 
him a fat gratuity. "How about a spot in a very, very quiet corner?" 

"Certainly." He'd make certain that no newshounds or table hoppers annoyed us during 
dinner. It was all part of Carman's service. 

More than one head turned as we were conducted through the crowded main room, 
where copper and pewter pans and utensils hung thickly from the ceiling like metallic 
bats. The air was filled with the smell of pricey broiled meat and garlic toast. 

Our table was secluded, in one of the cellarlike annex rooms. We perused leather-
bound menus while sipping aperitifs. I had a dry sherry while Jake knocked back a 
double of the fiery Highland single malt that was his favorite. 

"Seems a pity to anesthetize your taste buds with that kiltie coffin varnish in a 
restaurant like this," I murmured. "What the hell proof is it, anyhow?" 

"A hundred twenty-two cask strength, sonny-boy, and only an ignorant Arizona 
shitkicker would insult this nectar of the gods. All my years exiled on K-L, I only 
managed to get two bottles of Clynelish from the local bootleggers. Now I'm back on the 
Blue Marble, I'll make up for lost opportunities—especially since you're paying." 

"I apologize. Have another wee dram." 

"Damn right I will. And I expect a decent wine with the meal, too." 

So I got us a noble Haut-Brion '21. Jake ordered a grilled T-bone, potatoes Lyonnaise, 
and sauteed morels garnished with Aeolian krill—which he Insisted were kosher. I 
decided on a flash-seared Wagyu filet, a side of asparagus with mustard miso, and a salad 
of nittany ears. He had an appetizer of artichoke-stuffed ravioli. I chose tiny last-of-the-
season Quilcene oysters, definitely not kosher. 

"You want to tell me what you found out about Barky Tregarth?" I asked him after his 
second double scotch arrived. 

"Give you a little back-story first. Long time ago, when I was young like you and full 
of the same sort of sappy ideals, I got the goods on a superior of mine named Ram 
Mahtani. A tipoff and a data-trail seemed to show that Ram had taken juice—probably 
from the Carnelian Concern—to quash an investigation into violations of the Y'tata high-
tech weaponry embargo. Mahtani had always been a decent boss to me. And he was a 
devoted family man with a daughter who had lots of medical problems. So before I filed 
a report with Internal Affairs, I asked him if he had an explanation for the suspicious 
behavior." 

I said, "Oops." 

"Exactly. I used to be a hopeless softy. Anyhow, overnight the incriminating data 
disappeared in a convenient computer crash, and my tipster changed his story. Poof went 
the case against Mahtani. Three weeks later I was bounced from Criminal Investigation, 
transferred to Public Safety, and outward bound to a jerkwater world in the Perseus Spur. 
Ram Mahtani took early retirement from CCID the following year and became a highly 
paid security consultant for Carnelian." 


"Sad." I nibbled on a garlicky breadstick. 

"I remembered Ram when you asked me about Barky Tregarth. It's an open secret that 
Carnelian wholesalers in remote Sectors wink at contraband transactions. Their security 
people are alleged to keep a secret roster of trustworthy smugglers. I contacted 
Mahtani—anonymously, of course. He told me that Tregarth is very much alive. I said 
that my client had a business proposition for him and wasn't out to nail him. Mahtani 
might or might not have believed that. His price for Barky's current alias and address is 
two million in untraceable funds." 

"Holy shit!" 

"I told you you wouldn't like it." 

"Like it? I haven't got it." 

"Come on. You own a quarterstake in Rampart, for chrissake. Two mil isn't chump 
change, but it wouldn't even fuel that muscle starship of yours for a round-trip to the 
Spur." 

"Rampart pays my fuel bills. I do get a sizable draw—a salary—as a corporate officer, 
but I've been treating it like Monopoly money, funneling almost all of it off to needy Re-
versionist causes as soon as it hits my account. I've done the same with the income from 
my Rampart quarterstake." 

"Tell the party to give some of it back." 

"It's probably spent. You know pols." 

The succulent little oysters arrived. I gave them my full attention for the few minutes 
it took to wolf them down. 

Jake said, "So you really can't hack the bribe? I thought all you Frosts were richer than 
God." 

"I have some money of my own, but I was planning to use it to grease Tregarth." And 
for other upcoming expenses. "You think this Mahtani might haggle?" 

"The man's no street-corner fink, Helly. Two megabux was his price. And you might 
want to think very seriously about why he set it so high." 

I gave a gloomy nod. "To see how badly some anonymous party wants old Barky." 

"Here." Jake took a tiny notepad from his inner breast pocket, tore out a page and 
handed it to me. "Mahtani's contact number." 

The piece of paper had a phone code scrawled on it. "An ultrasecure routing server, I 
presume." 

"Of course ... And there's something else you should consider before you deal with 
this joker. He's a top-notch professional investigator and he has Carnelian resources to 
back him up. If you pay him, even with a blind EFT, he might be able to track you down 
and screw up your operation." 

"Yeah. Gran dinero leaves big footprints." 

All I needed was a Carnelian bloodsucker snatching Barky before I could milk him. Or 
interrogating him after the fact, which would be even worse—provided the guy did have 
crucial information about the Haluk. Adam Stanislawski's warning about lethal retaliation 
from threatened Haluk Consortium Concerns was still vivid in my memory. The question 
was, did Ram Mahtani know enough about Barky's past to make the Haluk connection? 

Rats. Maybe I'd have to forget about the old gunrunner. Unless I could spike Mahtani's 
guns, get what I wanted while simultaneously warning him off... 

The waiter appeared with our main course. We waited until he had finished arraying 


the planks with their sizzling chunks of meat and the various side dishes. 

I said to Jake, "I just had a brilliant idea. I'm going to try a loanshark for that two mil. 
A very large shark that Mahtani might not want to mess with." 

Jake shrugged. He tucked in with gusto while I entered a code into my pocket phone. 
It was one that I had never had occasion to use before, and I held my breath wondering 
whether the call would go through. 

But a familiar face finally appeared on the small screen. We stared at each other for a 
moment and then I lifted the instrument to my ear, cutting off the video. 

"What is it, Helly?" 

"Sorry to disturb you at home, sir. I have an urgent need for a large sum of untraceable 
credit. Naturally I will personally repay the loan at a future date, along with whatever 
interest you deem appropriate." 

"I see," Adam Stanislawski said. "How much?" 

"Two million, right now." 

"Very well." 

"Can you load a blind EFT card so that the hidden source of the funds will be 
Macrodur, not A. E. Frost, Esquire?" 

"Yes. Is this payment going directly to the person I mentioned at the end of our visit 
this afternoon?" 

Crafty old Adam. "Unfortunately not. It's a bribe to a go-between, a highly placed 
informant in Carnelian who knows the whereabouts of this person. The informant might 
be able to do me damage—but probably wouldn't dare go up against you." 

"The name." 

"Ram Mahtani." 

"I understand completely." 

"Let me level with you: I can't afford this steep a bribe, even if I wasn't scared stiff of 
Mahtani." 

Stanislawski laughed. "I can afford it. And I'm not afraid. Plug your card into the 
phone." 

I complied. The instrument's data strip indicated a transfer of funds, triple the amount 
I'd requested. 

"A contribution to the war chest," said the Macrodur chairman. "If Tregarth comes 
through, you'd better bring him back to Earth for safekeeping. Tell him I'll personally 
make it worth his while." 

"Will do. Thanks for the vote of confidence, sir." 

He nodded and broke off. 

"So that's how the simple folk do business," Jake marveled. 

"You ought to know," I said, very quietly. 

He sat still, his fork poised halfway to his mouth. The faintest trace of guilt shadowed 
his eyes. Then he calmly resumed eating. 

Gotcha, Jake. How else would Adam Stanislawski have known about the Barky Hunt? 

I picked up the phone again, engaging maximum encryption, a voice disguiser, and a 
masked code of my own to accommodate the server-link to Mahtani. 

A robot voice said, Code entered. Please hold. 

I put the phone down and we ate and drank in silence for a few minutes. Jake didn't 
meet my gaze. The Bordeaux was splendid and my chunk of pampered Japanese cattle 


flesh so tender that it surrendered to the knife with hardly any pressure. I only managed 
to gobble a few subtly flavored quivering slices before my phone, sitting on the table 
beside the asparagus, began to blink. 

I picked up and said, "Yes." 

"Do you accept my terms?" a disguised voice inquired. The view screen remained 
blank. 

"I have the EFT card ready." 

"Transmit the agreed-upon honorarium." 

I sent the mordida winging through the ether. Words popped up instantly on my 
instrument's readout strip. 

—— 

BARNEY CORNWALL-PHLEGETHON, ZONE 3 

—— 

"It has been my pleasure to assist you," said Mahtani, or whomever. "The information 
is accurate, as of today. Good evening." 

And he was gone. 

I showed the phone to Jake. "Where is this place? I've never heard of it." 

He munched a 'shroom redolent of shallots, wine, and exotic Crustacea before 
answering. 

"It's a hollow asteroid in a Sheltok Sagittarian system. One of the way stations for Shel 
UH carriers traveling from assorted R-class hellmouths in Zone 1 to the Orion Arm. Over 
the years, it attracted small-time human operators who traded with the local Joru and 
Y'tata worlds. The place expanded internally—sort of like an old tree getting hollowed 
out by more and more termite galleries. Now Phlegethon is a entrepot for all kinds 
offences and sleazy little trading outfits. Some are even legitimate." 

"Sounds like a perfect place for Barky." 

"Let's see if his Barney Cornwall alias computes," Jake said. 

He pulled out his own personal communicator, a police jobbie with more bells and 
whistles than mine, unfolded it, and summoned information from the CCID database. 
There was no trace of Barky Tregarth's revised moniker in any official listing. 

"Can you get direct access to the Phlegethon resident census through Sheltok?" I 
asked. 

"Officially, no. Unofficially ..." He entered a confidentiality override code, but gave a 
muttered curse of disappointment. "No one using the Cornwall or Tregarth names is on 
the asteroid's roster. Mahtani could have jerked us around, but I don't think so. He has a 
certain reputation to maintain. I think old Barky is lying low. You'll just have to go to 
Phlegethon and start digging." He grinned at me. "I'd lay odds that he'll know somebody's 
looking for him, too." 

"It figures," I said. "What else can you tell me about that part of the galaxy? How 
about checking the ZP crime stats for Zone 3?" 

He did so. "Hmm ... There's been a severe outbreak of piracy in those parts during the 
last couple of years. Twenty-one Sheltok megacarriers vanished without a trace, and 
others had close calls. I can get details from Zone Patrol." 

"I'd be obliged." 

His search indicated that the energy-ship attacks had been laid at the doorstep of Y'tata 
freebooters, denounced—but of course!—as outlaws by the righteous Y Federation. Jake 


popped me a data-dime with full particulars and I filed it for later study. 

"There could have been other hijackings that Sheltok didn't report to ZP," Jake said. 
There was something elusive in his tone that I didn't pick up on immediately. "Just 
rumors." 

I nodded. Sheltok might have good reasons of their own not to publicize the attacks, 
especially if they'd been skimping on fleet security. It was unusual for Y'tata crooks to be 
hijacking transactinides so aggressively. They were an ancient race of nearly humanoid 
albinos, with about a thousand planetary colonies on both sides of Red Gap. But their 
population was nearly stable, and they seemed content to piddle along with their 
relatively low-tech interstellar civilization, only occasionally resorting to piracy. Since 
they owned long-established ultraheavy element sources of their own in the Whorl, their 
marauders usually targeted freighters with more generalized cargoes ... 

For a while we ate in silence. I finished my main course and began on the salad. The 
nittany ears were crisp and tart, just the way I like them. 

After a time Jake said casually, "You planning to head for the Sag?" 

"In a few days, maybe. If Barky's inside that Sagittarian rock, I'll find him and wring 
him dry. Whether he has any useful information for me is another matter." 

"He might run," Jake said. "Mahtani is sure to warn him that someone's very anxious 
to meet him." 

"I'm betting he'll stay put, take precautions, and see what the deal is. I would, if I was 
in his position." 

"Whole lotta money to pay, long way to go, on an off chance." 

I gave him a cynical look. "Adam Stanislawski already knows why I'm interested in 
Barky Tregarth. No need to pump me, Jake." 

He grinned sheepishly. "What can I say?" 

Not much, I thought. 

"You're wondering what my price was," Jake went on. "The answer is: zero, zilch, 
zippo. You know I owe the Big M even more than I owe you. For my posting home. The 
agreement was, if I ever came across anything that might affect Macrodur significantly, I 
was to pass it along. Your peculiarly urgent need to interview Tregarth, a guy who once 
engaged in illicit trade with the Haluk, tripped the alarm." 

"You're a smart cop, Chief Superintendent." 

"And you're a crazy hotdogger. When you get on somebody's case, meshugeneh things 
happen. I remember Helly's Comet. I remember Cravat and Dagasatt. So you won't tell 
me what you want with Barky. But I happen to know that the guy's only claim to fame is 
a drunken boast that he once went to the Haluk Cluster and got back to tell the tale." 

"Bull's-eye." I refilled his empty wineglass. 

He eyed me with what might have been real concern. "You're not planning to go after 
Tregarth alone, are you? It wouldn't be wise. The old kocker didn't pick a dump like 
Phlegethon as a retirement haven. He's still on the job." 

There were people I might have asked to join me on the Barky Hunt: a smart young 
bodybuilder and an ex-ZP officer who'd started as hired hands and later became my 
friends; a small group of retired Rampart security agents recruited by Karl Nazarian to 
assist my semilegal campaign against Galapharma; even several private investigators I'd 
worked with during my Reversionist period. But Ivor Jenkins was far away in the Perseus 
Spur, operating his own gym on Seriphos, and Ildiko Szabo had taken over the wholesale 


flower business of her aging parents in Hungary. I'd lost touch with Karl's Over-the-Hill 
Gang during the long trial, and the Pi's were experienced in ferreting out capital 
chicanery, not crewing deep-space rumbles. 

Going after Barky Tregarth alone seemed a perfectly feasible option. Phlegethon 
would certainly cater to Joru traders as well as Y'tata, since both races lived in that sector 
of the galaxy. This fact had suggested to me a way I might visit the place under cover. I 
had no intention of telling Jake Silver about my scheme, however. 

"Thanks for the warning, Chief Super. Actually, I'm planning to muster my usual task 
force of space dreadnaughts and a brigade of commandos for the Barky bust. You can't 
afford to take chances with senile gunrunners." 

"Not Tregarth, you putz. His friends. I'm serious." 

"Y'tata pirates? Or are you talking about Carnelian's thugs? Or Sheltok's?" 

"All of the above—and maybe a wild card as well." He paused for an uncomfortable 
beat. "There might be funny business going on out there involving the Haluk." 

My jaw sagged. "Why didn't you say so before?" I demanded, none too politely. "You 
know you can set your own price." 

Jake winced. "I suppose I deserve that... But what I know, you can have for free. God 
knows it's little enough. A single report, about eighteen months ago, kept ex-database by 
special order of Xenoaffairs to avoid distressing our new blue trading partners. A patrol 
cruiser responded to an emergency call—the attempted hijack of a Sheltok trans-ack 
carrier in the Zone 3 section of Red Gap. The patrol captain claimed that they scanned 
four bandits during the attack. Three were typical Y'tata pirates. The fourth ship was a 
hell of a lot faster, with a slightly different fuel signature. It hung back during the 
firefight, then broke off and ran with the others. ZPV conformation scan of number four 
was futzed by weaponry EMI during the encounter, but the bandit wasn't human. Or Joru 
or Kalleyni, either. The fuel signature might have been Haluk." 

"In the Sagittarius Whorl? That's crazy! Too far from their Spur colonies, way beyond 
their lines of supply." 

Jake sawed away at the remains of the T-bone. "I heard about it from a half-drunk ZP 
Assistant Deputy Commissioner at a fuckin' cocktail party. We were discussing the Haluk 
expansion in the Perseus Spur. Their starships are all over Zone 23 now, scoping out 
potential colonies, trading with the Rampart worlds. Blueberry scouts have even been 
seen in the outer Orion Arm—and mere was this one anomalous spotting in the Sag, 
which might or might not have been Haluk." 

"It makes no sense. Why would they go there? And why throw in with Y'tata trans-ack 
nabbers? The Haluk don't need to steal ultraheavy elements. They sell them, for chris-
sake. The notion's ridiculous on the face of it." 

"Right. Whole lotta ridiculous shit going down these days. I'm glad I'm just a simple 
desk cop who doesn't have to worry about such things." 

The waiter materialized. "Can I interest you gentlemen in our dessert menu?" 

"What d'you think, Jake?" I inquired. "This might be our last meal together for quite a 
spell." 

"Coffee and cognac," the Chief Super said. "I don't suppose you have any Ferrand 
Reserve Ancestrale?" 

"Of course. An excellent choice." 

"Two," I said. 


The waiter nodded and went away. 

"Figuring to get in one last lick before riding into the sunset?" I asked Jake sadly. The 
cognac was one of Earth's finest, and the price was cosmological. 

"I guess that's up to you, Helly. Serve me right if you shit-canned our friendship." 

"Problem with that, I haven't got very many. Friends, that is." And he hadn't really 
done me any harm by telling Macrodur about the Barky Hunt. Maybe just the opposite. 

"How about I pay for the Ferrand?" he suggested. "Peace offering." 

"Peace is good," I said. 

When the waiter returned with the cognac and coffee, we drank to it. 

—— 

I saw Jake off on the Yonge Street subway, which would whisk him to his home in 
German Mills in about fifteen minutes, then started down the Path to the Winter Garden 
Theater, a twenty-minute walk south of Carman's restaurant. 

The commuter rush had slackened a little now that the day-shift workers from the 
towers had left and those on the evening watch were settled in, but there were still 
throngs of pedestrians heading for downtown attractions: shopping, nightlife, amusement, 
fine dining, and most especially the innumerable watering holes where congenial 
companionship of one sex or another awaited trolling lonelies. 

I got onto a very crowded moving walkway. Many of its riders were striding along to 
enhance their groundspeed, but I stood still at the far right side, since I was in no 
particular hurry. I was jostled often and hard by impatient passers, but thought nothing of 
it until a particularly sharp jab insulted my left hip and made me grunt with pain. The guy 
who did it sped past without an apology. He was small and slightly built, wearing a 
bomber jacket and carrying a bulky portfolio of the type favored by commercial artists. 

I stepped off the conveyor at a Jolie Jacqueline lingerie shop, cursing mildly. My 
assailant had left the moving walkway ahead of me and was skipping nimbly across the 
mainstream of pedestrian traffic on the opposite side of the concourse. He disappeared 
into a corridor leading to the Bodascon Tower escalators. 

There was a small hole in the side of my anorak that looked almost like a stab from an 
icepick. The armored lining was visible and the edges of the hole seemed wet. What the 
hell had Bomber Jacket hit me with—a large pen or some other sharp artist's implement? 
Mellow with expensive alcohol and the heavy dinner, it never occurred to me that the 
poke hadn't been accidental. My survival instincts, which had been on red alert during the 
perils of the late Galapharma takeover, were rusty after nearly three years of disuse. 

I looked up at the opulent window display of silk and lace in Jolie Jacqueline. A 
thought came to me, a way to repay Jake's favor while simultaneously playing a mild 
practical joke to point up his treachery. I stepped into the shop. 

"May I be of assistance, m'sieu?" A saleswoman of a certain age, wearing a little black 
dress, approached me with an encouraging smile. Her name badge said ANNETTE. She did 
a very creditable French accent. 

I flicked off my intimidating privacy visor in a gesture of civility. "Would you please 
show me your very nicest nightgown and peignoir set? I'm not sure of the size, but I think 
I can eyeball it." 

"Of course. Let me bring you several choices." 

I followed Annette to a counter. The items she showed me were very pricey indeed. I 
selected an ensemble in cherry-red silk chiffon with lots of lace inserts, gave her my 


corporate EFT card, and consulted my phone dex for the home address of Chief 
Superintendent Jake Silver and his wife of twenty-eight years. 

"I'd like the package gift-wrapped and sent to Marie Warrener, 163 Linden Crescent, 
German Mills, Markham." 

"Certainly, m'sieu. Will there be an enclosure?" 

I took one of the tiny cards she offered and wrote, From your adoring Snuggle-Puppy, 
Jake. 

While Annette wrapped Marie's present, I wandered idly around the small shop, 
indulging a fantasy or two. There were no other customers in Jolie Jacqueline. The place 
had a boudoir decor with soft lights, gauzy hangings, discreetly semitransparent 
holograms of lovely ladies modeling sexy underthings, and a lot of gold-framed mirrors. 
In one of the angled ones I caught a close-up glimpse of my own back. 

Right at rump level, the Anonyme's outer fabric had been perforated twice more. 
Around each small hole was a dampish corona. 

I felt my throat tighten. Those earlier jostlings on the walkway had been less vigorous 
attempts to stab me. The wet spots suggested that Bomber Jacket had tried to inject me 
with an unknown substance, probably poison. 

Damn! Think, Hetty, think. Get your sozzled brain back in gear. 

A random attack by a psycho? It had been known to happen, even in beautiful 
cosmopolitan Toronto. 

Had Ram Mahtani traced me after all and taken out a contract on my life now that he 
had his money? Impossible. The time frame was too tight and the motive wasn't there. 

Had Jake Silver sold out my ass to somebody other than Stanislawski? No way. It 
made sense that Jake would nark on me to Macrodur in a manner that did me no 
particular harm. That he'd be an accessory to my murder was inconceivable. 

Think, Hetty, think. 

Bomber Jacket could have trailed me from the moment I left Rampart Tower. If he 
was a real pro, he could have ID'ed me easily through a body language analysis, in spite 
of the concealing Anonyme. Everybody has a distinctive walk, individual arm and head 
mannerisms. During my brief political fling the media had made countless holovids of 
me. My motion signature would be easily obtainable. 

So who genuinely wanted me dead? 

The minor villains in Galapharma had been neutralized long ago. If Gala's ex-CEO, 
Alistair Drummond, was still alive, he was certainly crazy enough to come after me out 
of revenge. But Bomber Jacket himself wasn't Drummond. My old nemesis was a tall 
Scotsman with a princely bearing, not a skittering runt. And why would Drummond have 
waited so long? 

The only others who had any motive for killing me shouldn't have known yet that I 
was an immediate threat to their galactopolitical ambitions. But maybe the Haluk had 
other reasons for wanting me out of the picture. The article in the Journal would have 
reminded them that I was now at leisure and once again in a position to cause them 
serious trouble in the Commonwealth Assembly. 

And if there were still Haluk demiclone agents in Galapharma's woodwork, they might 
have learned about Lorne Buchanan's transfer of incriminating data from the Concern's 
computer to that of Efrem Sontag. 

I let out an involuntary snarl of disgust. My night at the theater was a scrub. I'd have to 


get back to the safety of Rampart Tower as quickly as possible, then lie low until I could 
take off for the Sagittarius Whorl— 

"Is there another way I can be of assistance, m'sieu?" 

Annette had snuck up on me. "No thanks. I was just checking a rip in my jacket." 

I turned my visor back on and drifted to the door. Blank-faced, I carefully studied the 
crowd outside. There was no sign of Bomber Jacket. I exited the shop and walked a few 
meters away to put a solid wall at my back, then took out my phone and called Rampart 
Internal Security. 

"InSec. Duty Officer Callahan." 

"This is Asahel Frost, Sean. I need a squad to come and get me. I'm on the Path 
between Bodascon and Daimler Towers. Someone just tried to stab me. Three times. My 
jacket armor saved me." 

Sean Callahan stifled an exclamation. "I understand. I'll have bike patrol cops get to 
you immediately. Just activate your personal emergency beacon. Meanwhile, my 
situation team will take a hopper to Bodascon skyport and—" 

"No. I don't want Bodascon Security involved." The colossal aerospace Concern was a 
prominent member of the Haluk Consortium. "Or Toronto Public Safety, either. This has 
got to be kept quiet. Now listen carefully. Put three of your plainclothes people on the 
subway at Osgoode. Let them come up the loop from the south. I'll backtrack north on the 
Path and meet them at College Station." 

"The subway!" Callahan was incredulous. "It would really be safer If you remained 
right where you are, under police guard, and we flew in. If you don't want a touch at 
Bodascon skyport we could come via Daimler." 

"The hit man ran up into Bodascon. He could call for reinforcements from—" I shut 
my mouth. I hadn't seen any Haluk pedestrians for a long time, but their embassy was 
only a couple of blocks away. However, I didn't want to share my suspicion of the aliens 
with a low-level employee like Callahan. 

"Sir?" 

I said, "I think the perp is long gone. I'm safer moving with the crowd than standing 
still. The call is mine to make, Sean. Have your troops meet me at College Station. We 
can all take a nice slow taxi ride to Rampart Tower. Frost out." 

I started back the way I'd come, not using the moving walkway and staying near a wall 
whenever possible. There were only two short blocks to go. The crowds were thicker, but 
the hustle and bustle seemed entirely normal. I made it to the subway intersection without 
incident and turned east. Access to the transit station above was via an escalator. I got on 
a rising step just behind a young woman in a red coat who carried a Bergdorf shopping 
bag. 

We'd nearly reached the upper level when I felt a stinging sensation in my left calf. 
Almost instantly my body's voluntary muscles began to freeze. I felt myself toppling 
toward the woman. She made a dismayed noise. 

"Whoa! Easy there, Fred. We gotcha, ol' buddy." 

A man two steps below came up beside me and took hold of my arms to support me. 
Another guy joined him immediately. Stiff as a board from the injected paralytic, I felt 
small objects being shoved into each of my armpits. All of a sudden I wasn't falling 
anymore; I was floating. 

The faces of my assailants were unremarkable. The first wore a black leather car coat 


and blue jeans. The other had a brown fleece jacket over a business suit and carried a 
sport duffelbag on a shoulder strap, which must have concealed the injector. The pair 
worked together, one at my side and the other on the step below, clamping my upper 
arms firmly to my body and keeping a tight grip on my elbows. The anti-grav devices in 
my pits made manhandling me a snap. 

Boozy fumes wafted from somewhere. I presumed one of the goons had spritzed it 
onto me to enhance the charade of drunkenness. The woman in the red coat stared over 
her shoulder with ill-concealed disgust, and so did a few rub-beraeckers on the adjacent 
descending escalator. Thanks to the Anonyme, no one could see the twisted expression of 
fury on my face. 

"We'll take care of him," Black Leather told the woman glibly. "Not to worry. Sorry if 
he bumped into you." 

"Poor old Fred," Brown Fleece added. "He had a really bad day, y'know? Lost a major 
client, then tried to kill the pain with too many vodka martinis." 

The woman turned her back on us. Some of the other stair riders looked sympathetic. 

"You just take it easy, mate," Black Leather told me in a jovial voice. "Try not to 
throw up on these nice people. We'll get you safe to a taxi and home to beddy-bye." 

"What're drinking buddies for?" Brown Fleece chimed in. "You're gonna be okay, 
except for a helluva hangover tomorrow." 

I tried to speak. Couldn't produce more than a breathy croak. 

My cowboy-booted feet floated a centimeter off the ground as the escalator reached 
the subway station level. There were no Rampart Security personnel existing the standing 
train. Probably they'd be along on the next one, for all the good it would do me. 

I wafted between the pair of abductors like a human balloon. They steered me onto 
another escalator going up to the street, continuing their solicitous patter. I was just 
another upper-class lush being helped along by friends. 

Outside, we crossed Dundas Square. Pedestrians averted their eyes. A bike cop gave 
us the once-over, decided all was cool. We moved along the sidewalk, turned into a 
narrow lane amidst a row of small historic houses that huddled beneath a stubby business 
tower. The crowd thinned immediately and the streetlighting became less intense. 

A Mercedes limousine was parked illegally at the exit of an underground parking lot. 
Its doors opened as one of my captors zapped it with a remote control. They removed the 
lifting devices under my arms and eased me into a forward-facing seat in the capacious 
passenger section. Black Leather got in beside me. Brown Fleece tossed his duffel in 
front and slipped behind the wheel, leaving the sliding privacy panel open. The car doors 
shut. 

Fleece addressed the car navigator. "Enter Ottawa Highroad eastbound. Go to Express 
Lane Six. Go to Peterborough 122. Exit highroad northbound and revert to manual 
control." 

En route, said the car. 

We were off, circling around Ryerson Tower and hanging a right to the on-ramp of the 
highroad. A longish wait in line until it was our turn to accelerate—then up, up and away, 
thirty meters above the teeming city on an elevated twelve-lane ribbon, our limousine 
guided precisely into the far-left express lane where motorists in a hurry paid a premium 
toll to travel at speeds of 300 kph. Unfortunately, because of tonight's heavy volume of 
traffic, the express lane was limited to a mere 230 kph, while the five nonpremium east-


bound lanes limped along at 170. 

Any hope I might have entertained that my kidnappers were human melted away when 
Leather said something to Fleece in the Haluk language. Fleece laughed—not human-
style, but in the throttled-puppy mirth idiom of the blue aliens. 

Black Leather reached into the right sleeve of my Anonyme and flicked the switch. 
The visor blinked off and the security catch unlocked. He pushed off my hood and spoke 
to me in Standard English. 

"If you make a very strong effort, you'll be able to blink your eyes. I suggest you do it 
as often as possible to avoid desiccated corneas. You should voluntarily swallow your 
saliva, too, unless you enjoy drooling. The drug has no other unpleasant side effects. The 
rest of your autonomic nervous system should remain safely operational until we give 
you the antidote later." He smiled. "Much later." 

I managed a grunt, then blinked and swallowed. 

It wasn't hard to do, it was rather easy. And my previously numb toes and ringers and 
tongue were starting to tingle. 

Hello! 

They'd shot me with a toxin that preserved consciousness, going for the leg after my 
armored anorak had foiled the body hits. A jab in the lower calf would have worked 
nicely on somebody wearing conventional executive footgear. 

But I was a cowboy. 

The injector had penetrated the tough leather of my boot with difficulty. It must have 
been slightly deflected and failed to deliver the entire dose. I'd taken in enough chemical 
to paralyze me, but the stuff might already be starting to wear off. 

I sat absolutely still. We were traveling through the rainy night, out from under the 
force-umbrella now, soaring over Toronto's eastern suburbs. I speculated briefly upon the 
reason why my captors hadn't taken me to the Haluk embassy or even Oshawa Starport 
out in Lake Ontario rather than heading out of town toward Peterborough. 

North of the interchange at kilometer 122 were roads leading into the Kawarthas, a 
picturesque region of lakes, rolling woodlands, and pretty little towns: Bridgenorth and 
scores of other dormitory exurbs, modest art colonies and resorts like Fenelon Falls 
where my friend Bea Mangan and her husband had a technocottage, enclaves of stunning 
affluence such as Mount Julian, where top Concern executives maintained pseudorustic 
pieds-a-terre on Stony Lake. 

Come to think of it, when he wasn't hunkered down at Galapharma HQ in Glasgow, 
Alistair Drummond had lived up in the Kawarthas, too ... 

The demiclones talked freely to each other in the difficult Haluk language, confident 
that their paralyzed prisoner, like so many lazy translator-addicted Earthlings, was unable 
to understand them. 

Mistake. 

—— 

During my politically active phase, when I was eloquently disparaging the 
secretiveness of the Haluk before one of the commerce committees and it looked as 
though the Delegates were starting to take me seriously, the Servant of Servants of Luk 
made a diplomatic gesture intended to defuse a deteriorating public relations situation. 

The Haluk leader proposed a guided tour of Artiuk, their principal colony in the 
Perseus Spur, to show that his race had nothing to hide. The invitation was extended to 


twelve influential members of the committee, three media representatives from 
Newsweek, Cosmos Today, and the Times ... and me, badass motormouth celebrity. 
Because of delicate Haluk cultural inhibitions, no audiovisual recording devices would be 
allowed; but we visitors would be able to dictate copious notes into handheld computers. 

The SSL's invitation was eagerly accepted. 

Alone among my human colleagues, I chose to take a sleep-course in the Haluk 
language during the eight-day trip out to the Spur. It was something I'd been meaning to 
do for a long time: know thine enemy, and all that. The other members of the group opted 
for the greater convenience and efficiency of mechanical translators. I intended to wear 
one, too; but I'd hatched a vague plan to discard the thing conspicuously at some point 
during the tour, hoping to provoke our Haluk hosts into making imprudent comments in 
the belief that I wouldn't understand them. 

As it happened, my subterfuge wasn't necessary. The translators worn by us humans 
malfunctioned almost from the first moment we set foot on Artiuk—perhaps because its 
solar system was in the throes of a sudden ionic storm, perhaps for another reason 
altogether. Whatever the source of the problem, the fritzed-out devices reduced Haluk 
speech to incomprehensible gibberish, and they could not be repaired with the tools 
available on the alien world. 

This might have put a serious damper on our visit, had not the Servant of Servants 
graciously provided each one of us with an English-speaking Haluk escort. These high-
ranking officials of his personal staff subsequently accompanied us everywhere and 
filtered all conversations between us and the Artiuk locals. 

The Haluk facial structure is not conducive to emotional display. I was able to discern 
that the instant translations the guides provided us were often very creative. 

As I'd expected, the "fact-finding tour" turned out to be little more than a puff job. It 
revealed only superficial aspects of Haluk life and absolutely nothing about their 
military-industrial capability. We were allowed close contact only with gracile-phase 
humanoid individuals. 

"It would be depressing for you to meet the poor lepido-dermoids, much less view the 
dormant testudinals," our hosts said, gently reproving curious members of the delegation. 
"And besides, there are no longer very many nongracile Haluk residing on Artiuk, thanks 
to the miracle of your PD32:C2 genetic engineering vector, which has changed our lives 
so marvelously by eradicating the curse of allomorphism." 

So we saw what the Haluk wanted us to see: performances of dissonant Haluk music, 
displays of beautiful Haluk artwork, timid Haluk children at crowded primary schools 
who presented us with bouquets of alien flowers, Haluk agronomists operating 
impressive hydroponic farms that grew produce mildly poisonous to the human digestive 
tract. It was all very edifying, and to sophisticated human galaxy trotters, duller than 
belly-button lint. 

Unless one happened to understand what the non-English-speaking Haluk were 
actually saying about their distinguished visitors. 

The adults hated our collective entrails because we had cruelly stalled Haluk 
emigration to the Milky Way and charged extortionate prices for PD32:C2 and other vital 
technology. The poor little Haluk kids were scared rigid of us because the adults had told 
them that humans were cannibals who ate misbehaving children. 

I did my best to share eavesdropped intelligence with the Assembly Delegates and the 


reporters, but my well-known anti-Haluk bias bent my credibility. In the end the 
relentless hospitality of the Servant of Servants and his minions won the hearts of our 
group. 

When we returned to Earth, the media special reports were glowing. A month later the 
Haluk treaties were ratified by the Assembly. 

From my alarmist point of view, the trip had been worse than useless. All I'd really 
gained was a superficial knowledge of an abstruse alien tongue, most of which faded 
from my mind almost immediately. 

But not all of it. 

—— 

Under computer control, the limousine roared along the storm-lashed elevated road. 
The rain was now mixed with ice pellets. Brown Fleece relaxed behind the wheel, lit a 
cigarette—the vice had spread like wildfire among the blue aliens resident on Earth—and 
spoke in the Haluk language to the leather-jacketed demiclone seated at my right. 

"Blah blah will be up a copulatory orifice because we are so late. One fears the road 
blah blah blah. It is the last day of the normal human work blah and blah blah blah" 

Black Leather said, "One might as well be fighting the blah back home on [some 
Haluk planet]. Great Almighty Luk help our blah posteriors if we blah blah blah" 

Fleece: "One is carefully watching the blah blah. At present the sky road is blah all 
the way to Peterborough." 

Leather: "Thank Almighty Luk ..." 

The demiclones were complaining about Friday night traffic. Welcome to the club. 

Fleece said, "One presumes that our next blah blah will be to take the brother." 

What! 

Leather: "Ru Balakalak will decide. The angry human blah still strongly resists that 
idea. He blah blah blah. And he thinks the brother lacks blah blah." 

I exerted all my willpower to avoid flinching in dismay. Were these turkeys referring 
to my disreputable brother Daniel? 

Fleece: "This one believes the revised plan using the brother is superior. And the blah 
younger sister would blah blah blah his disappearance." 

Leather: "Perhaps. The brother is surely more easily blah than the appalling human 
blah. But does he possess blah blah to accomplish blah blah blah!" 

Fleece: "Maybe not, if one can trust blah of the angry human blah." 

Leather: "Curse all humans! The plan itself is excellent but blah blah of it stinks like 
lepido nose wax. This one will continue to urge strongly that a Haluk blah blah be used, 
rather than any human blah." 

Fleece: "Who will listen to one? Ru Balakalak leads. He is a stubborn [epithet] and 
favors the quickest blah blah in order to please the Servant of Servants. The danger blah 
blah blah." 

Leather: "[Epithet.] One wishes we would blah blah blah and put an end to it." 

Fleece: "We are not ready. One knows that. When we are ready, it will happen." 

There followed an interval of portentous silence, during which I felt my guts twisting 
into a granny knot. Were they talking about an attack against humanity? And what kind 
of plan would they have that would involve me, my wretched brother, my sister Beth, and 
another human? I was trying to sort this out when my thoughts were suddenly interrupted 
by a resounding Haluk curse from Black Leather. 


"Are we slowing down?" he called out to his compatriot. "We are!" 

Up front, Brown Fleece was studying the navigation display, which was not visible 
from the passenger compartment. "Almighty Luk! The blah indicates a blah blahl" He 
broke into a tirade of alien vituperation. 

Black Leather spoke impatiently to the car in Standard English. "Navigator, why is 
traffic decelerating?" 

The robot voice said, A vehicle on-board computer has malfunctioned catastrophically 
and caused a multiple-car accident with injuries at kilometer 100.4. All six eastbound 
lanes are blocked at that point. 

A sea of red brakelights glowed in the sleet storm outside as the marvelous automated 
speedway reverted to ox-road status. Pavement deicing equipment had kicked in, adding 
clouds of steam to the atmospheric melange. 

"Exit!" Leather commanded his associate. "Hurry, before we are blah\" 

But we had just passed the ramp at Enniskillen. Fleece asked the navigator, "What is 
our next exit option?" 

Exit 80, the Lindsay-Clarington freeway, fifteen kilometers ahead. Estimated time of 
arrival at this exit is now approximately 21:10 hours. 

Black Leather spat more exotic obscenities and smacked his fist furiously against the 
refreshment console just in front of our seat. Our speed was now less than 40 kph and still 
dropping. We were going to be hung up for over an hour, creeping at a snail's pace 
toward the next exit together with hundreds of other luxury vehicles and their fuming 
occupants. 

I wiggled my toes. The tingling had faded. 

"Can we not summon an aircraft to blah us out of this fex-pletiveJT' Black Leather 
asked his companion. 

The limousine, of course, could be programmed to exit the highroad all by itself if we 
were evacuated via hopper. Perhaps other trapped bigwig motorists were also considering 
that extreme option, although private aircraft were forbidden to land on the highroad, and 
the storm made the prospect of being winched into the sky through the roof hatch an 
uninviting one. 

Fleece said, "One doubts that would save significant time, since our blah blah aircraft 
are blah at Mount Julian." 

Leather groaned. "[Convoluted expletive.] Then we are truly blah, my friend." 

"One must blah blah our delay." Fleece began to speak in an undertone into the 
driver's communicator. 

Muttering, the alien sitting on my right opened the refreshment console and took out a 
packet of cigarettes. The limo was rolling more and more slowly. At speeds of less than 
10 kph it would be possible to unlock the doors manually from the inside. 

I flexed the fingers of my left hand. They worked. So did the other muscles of that 
arm, which I tensed gingerly without making any suspicious motion. The paralyzing 
agent seemed to have almost worn off. 

Right. Wait for the moment. 

Slower. Slower. 

Now. 

Black Leather was holding a flameless electric lighter to his smoke. I slammed a 
roundhouse left hook into his face, singeing my knuckles on the glowing cigarette tip as I 


drove it and the red-hot lighter against his mouth. 

He let out a hideous cry and clawed at me like a madman. I slammed his head down 
onto the console and flicked the lock switch. In the front seat, Brown Fleece whirled 
around, gabbling in Haluk. He was too far away to reach me. I tore open my door, 
dropped outside onto the road shoulder, picked myself up, and stumbled toward the inner 
guardrail. 

Fleece was opening his own door as I vaulted over the barrier onto the median safety 
catwalk that separated the eastbound highroad lanes from the westbound. It was very 
cold. Traffic was now nearly at a standstill on our side, and vapor from melting pavement 
ice swirled amidst the driving sleet. Crouching low, I raced back the way we'd come, 
forgetting that I would be silhouetted against the headlights of oncoming cars. I still wore 
my Anonyme anorak. With the hood off I was half blinded by the torrent of stinging sleet 
pellets. They hissed against the vehicle surfaces like a nest of rattlesnakes, almost 
drowning out the roar of turbo engines powering the automobiles of more fortunate 
motorists in the open westbound lanes. 

Solid ground lay thirty meters below the catwalk grating, hidden by mist and the 
purple glow of the powerful anti-gravity reticulum that buoyed up the ribbon of 
reinforced pavement. The AG field was generated by machinery housed in huge pylons 
situated every 500 meters along the highroad. The only emergency exits for pedestrians 
were inside those pylons. Under normal conditions, auto breakdown service and 
ambulance evacuation for accident victims were accomplished by Highroad Authority 
hoppercraft. The police used hoppers, too. 

Over the noise of the westbound traffic and the storm I heard ominous sharp pinging 
sounds. A volley of stun-darts zipped around me, striking the ceramalloy stanchions and 
railings. 

Running flat-out along the catwalk, I managed to pull up my armored anorak hood an 
instant before one of the darts struck the back of my skull and bounced off. The impact 
caused me to see stars momentarily and stagger with pain. 

I recovered my senses, belatedly realized that the unimpeded stretch of catwalk was a 
perfect shooting gallery, and flung myself back over the railing onto the shoulder. 
Bobbing and swerving, I darted like a cockroach into the six lanes of crawling cars, now 
spaced precisely three meters apart by the traffic-control computer. A few startled drivers 
honked and flashed their headlights frantically. Most of them ignored me. 

Brown Fleece was galloping along the shoulder, showing no inclination to follow me 
out among the moving cars. Darts loaded with sleepy-juice flew through the sleet-
streaked headlight beams like supercharged fireflies, missed me, and ricocheted off the 
vehicles. 

Nobody opened a car door and invited me inside to safety. 

My bruised head hurt like hell. The sleet was changing to heavy flakes of wet snow 
and visibility was terrible. 

Another dart hit me in the back of my armored jacket. I thanked God that my 
vulnerable legs were shielded by the surrounding cars. All I could do was continue to 
zigzag through the traffic jam, taking small comfort from the realization that Brown 
Fleece certainly had orders to take me alive. His weapon was probably an Ivanov stun-
pistol that typically fired small missiles with a limited range. It would be virtually 
impossible for the Haluk demiclone to use the gun's none-too-reliable autotargeter system 


while taking snap shots in a storm. 

I was moving faster than Fleece, but for a time he nearly kept pace with me, not 
having to lose ground by dodging. Two more darts hit my right arm and upper body, 
painful but not incapacitating. There was a lull in firing when he might have replaced the 
magazine, then the pops came faster and more furiously. All of the darts missed. I had 
pulled well ahead of him. 

Less than a hundred meters away was one of the massive pylon structures, barely 
visible in the thickening snow. If I reached it I could escape down the emergency 
stairway that spiraled through its interior. Perhaps the alien wouldn't follow. Some of the 
motorists might have reported the running gun battle to the police by now, if only 
because of superficial damage done to their expensive vehicles by the fusillade of stun-
darts. 

I heard a distant shout in the Haluk language and understood only one word: coming. 

I didn't dare look over my shoulder, but I had a bad feeling that Black Leather had 
pulled his scorched shit together and joined the chase. Slush was beginning to accumulate 
underfoot in spite of the deicing grid. 

Run, Helly, run! It's not far now. Don't slow down ... 

But I was. Residual chemicals circulating in my bloodstream had diminished my 
stamina. My lungs were on fire, my vision was going blurry and weird, and my leg 
muscles were seizing up. 

Rats. 

The two Haluk behind me were shouting back and forth to each other. No one in the 
soundproofed vehicles would hear them, much less catch the alien intonation. Brown 
Fleece had once again stopped shooting at me with the Ivanov. Maybe he was out of 
ammo. 

I quit jinking among the cars and did a straight sprint, tearing along the line of glowing 
little eyes that divided lane five from lane four, squinting into the misty headlight glare. 
Snow pelted my face. My mind was empty of all thought except attaining the shelter of 
the massive pylon that arched above the road ahead of me, floodlit and crowned with 
ruby aircraft-warning lights. 

I was only forty meters away when I skidded on a slippery patch, lost my footing, and 
crashed to the slushy pavement right in front of a slow-moving Volvo taxi. I rolled aside 
just in time to avoid being crushed, then heard a sudden loud noise followed by shrill 
female screaming. 

My fall had apparently saved me. I hauled myself up and saw that the safety-glass 
windshield of the Acura sedan next in line had been holed and spiderwebbed by a missile. 
The hysterical woman behind the wheel cowered away from the empty front passenger 
seat, where a slim black object with a distinctive shape was embedded in the headrest. It 
was a magnum stun-flechette from an Allenby SM-440 or some other high-powered 
carbine. Black Leather had brought in heavy artillery. 

"Lady, get down!" I yelled. She dropped out of sight, still wailing, as her car moved 
on. A second flechette barely missed my head and soared over the traffic into the 
darkness beyond lane one. 

I took a dive myself, scrambling along on hands and knees, hugging the shelter of the 
slow-rolling automobiles. Then Black Leather changed his tactics. Big darts began to 
whiz beneath the vehicles, clanging occasionally against their undercarriages and wheels. 


The flechettes were no danger to the cars' self-sealing tires or sturdy chassis, but I wasn't 
at all sure that the thin armor of my anorak would protect me from them. 

Was Leather using a warm-body scope or a light magnifier to spot me? The capability 
of either one would have been stretched to the limit in a snowstorm, with the target 
skittering among closely packed moving cars whose engines radiated infrared, on a 
heated pavement swirling with vapor. Maybe he wasn't trying to hit me at all, but hoping 
to flush me out of the traffic so his buddy could shoot me on the side of the road. 

I went into a crouch and duckwalked ludicrously between the lanes, splashing through 
icy slop, doing my best to shield my legs under the skirts of the anorak. God only knows 
what the passing motorists thought about the wacky spectacle. Not a one had attempted to 
intervene personally. In their place I'd have opted for noninvolvement, too. 

The firing stopped. So did I, a few minutes later. 

I'd made it—sort of. 

I was beneath the gargantuan pylon structure at last, shuddering with cold, squatting 
between creeping streams of traffic in lane five and the express lane. All I had to do now 
was cross the exposed shoulder, pass through an opening in the inner guardrail, and climb 
three steps onto a small platform where there was a door in the pylon wall. The 
illuminated sign above it said: 

—— 

EMERGENCY EXIT ONLY 

USE PHONE TO SUMMON ASSISTANCE 

—— 

If only! The phone was on the wall right beside the door. As I contemplated the 
useless instrument in bemusement, a single small Ivanov stun-dart smacked into it and 
rattled onto the platform. 

Wonderful. Brown Fleece was back in the game, probably shooting from the median 
catwalk, daring me to make a run for it. 

What an idiot. If he hadn't given himself away, I might have dashed right across his 
field of fire. I tried without success to spot him in the blowing snow and steam clouds 
outside the pylon archway, but I figured that the dumb xeno couldn't be very far away. 
And his pal— 

A magnum flechette hummed past my head like a wasp. Its trajectory indicated that 
Black Leather was firing from the same lane divider I was parked on. A sudden gust of 
wind tore the mist and I saw him, his body eerily illuminated by the lights of cars passing 
on either side. He was no more than twenty-five meters away, with his carbine stock 
against his cheek. 

I was a sitting duck. 

"The next dart will take you down, Frost!" he shouted. "Get up! On your feet! Now!" 

Why didn't he just nail me where I was? 

... Because he was afraid that I'd convulse as the magnum load of toxin hit me, fall 
under the wheels of a car and be injured or killed. The earlier wild firing had been a panic 
response. Leather definitely intended to herd me onto the road shoulder, where Brown 
Fleece would drop me safely with the Ivanov. 

An idea. 

I turned away from Black Leather, ignoring his shouts, and studied the oncoming 
traffic in the express lane. A Volkswagen Lady Bug trundled past, followed by one of 


those ass-dragger Maseratis—scant shelter for a cowering fugitive. Behind the Italian car 
came an enormous black Dodge Bighorn sport utility vehicle with chrome rollbars and 
noseguards and great deep-tread balloon tires. It was the kind of transport that intrepid 
wilderness travelers favor for jaunts to Hudson Bay or the Canadian tundra. Silly role-
players used them for city commuting. 

"Stand up, Frost!" Black Leather yelled. He sent another flechette over my head, 
missing me by a whisker. "On your feet, dammit!" 

Instead, I began to squirm and moan as though I'd been nicked, crumpling onto the 
wet pavement. The Maserati passed by. As the lumbering SUV drew even with me, I 
rolled sideways beneath it, caught hold of an ice-encrusted shock absorber inside the 
monstrous right front wheel, hooked one leg over a transmission bracket and hoisted 
myself off the ground. 

Screamed my lungs out. Then shut up abruptly. 

I could hear the two Haluk demiclones bellowing incomprehensibly at each other in 
their own language. Would the ruse work? Only if Fleece, over on the catwalk and 
hopefully closer to me than Leather, took the bait. 

Someone came running, splashing through snow saturated with meltwater. Legs clad 
in sodden suit trousers trotted along the shoulder, close beside the slow-moving 
juggernaut. Brown Fleece shouted: "One does not see him! Perhaps he is beneath, being 
dragged by the blah!" 

Oh, yeah! I let go and fell unharmed between the four great wheels. Lay still a 
moment, then rolled quickly onto the shoulder as the big black SUV moved on. It was no 
trick at all avoiding the Toyota estate wagon creeping along behind it. Brown Fleece 
hadn't seen me. He was still scuttling along, Ivanov in hand, trying to peer under the 
chassis of the Dodge behemoth. 

Black Leather did spot me and yelled a sharp warning to his buddy. 

Too late. I tackled Fleece. We both went down hard, less than half a meter from the 
stream of traffic. The stun-pistol flew from his hand and disappeared among the cars. We 
wrestled on the shoulder pavement for a few moment before he managed to slither out of 
my grasp. He bounced to his feet, leaving me sprawled in the slush, and fetched me a 
nasty kick in the head. When he tried to stomp my face I seized his foot in midair with 
both hands, twisted viciously, and felt a satisfying crackle of anklebones. He howled and 
fell. 

Fleece rolled in the direction of the guardrail, trying to rise in spite of his injured 
ankle, roaring with pain and rage. I lay much closer to the express lane traffic. I was 
having trouble standing myself. I'd bashed both knees badly during the tackle, and the 
kick in the head had rattled my neurons. 

Fleece made a flying leap, knocked me onto my back, straddled my body, pinned my 
right arm, and began to batter my face with both fists. Spiking him in the kidney with my 
left mid-knuckle didn't do him much harm; the fleece jacket was excellent padding. I 
bucked up my hips, throwing him unexpectedly forward and forcing him to brace himself 
against falling by extending his arms. Then I caught him in the crotch and squeezed his 
genitals with all my strength. He screamed and writhed sideways into the express lane, 
clutching himself, just as a big Daimler towncar cruised sedately by. 

Both left wheels went over his neck. The towncar deviated not a millimeter from its 
computerized vector. Its cocooned occupants might not even have seen what had 


happened. They would have felt only a minimal double bump. 

In the stormy sky to the southwest a small constellation of fuzzy blue lights was 
intermittently visible, flying at a low altitude. 


Chapter 5 

 

I was dazed, hurting, soaked, and half frozen. My face was one huge bruise, my hands 
were flayed, and the rest of me felt like it'd been stomped by Cape buffalo. 

With difficulty, I pulled Brown Fleece back onto the shoulder and .crouched beside 
him. Blood leaked from his mouth. His head was impossibly twisted to one side, the jaw 
dislocated and the windpipe crushed. The pupils of his eyes were totally dilated, and a 
growing stench indicated that his sphincters had relaxed. When I thought to check his 
mangled throat for a pulse, I couldn't find any. The alien spirit that had animated his 
humanoid flesh had fled. 

... But the unknown man whose DNA had been stolen to disguise Fleece was probably 
still alive, floating comatose in a dystasis tank on an exotic world, forced to share his 
genes again and again in order to create more perfidious replicas of himself. 

I felt no sense of triumph at Brown Fleece's demise. Instead, there was a flashback. To 
the last time I'd killed Haluk who masqueraded as human beings. 

On the planet Dagasatt, I'd found hundreds of demiclone subjects in paired tanks in a 
secret laboratory. Many of the Haluk floaters were already transformed into perfect 
human replicas, while the pathetic human templates had partially morphed into Haluk 
form, a side effect of the genen procedure that precluded rejection of their DNA by the 
alien receptors. 

I shot each demiclone in the head. It was not a part of my life I was proud of, but I had 
no regrets, either. 

Before I could rescue the captive human templates on Dagasatt, alien gunships arrived 
and leveled the facility with heavy blasters. I escaped the holocaust; but I still walked 
through that damned laboratory in my nightmares, staring in disbelief at the paired tanks 
with their Halukoid humans and humanoid Haluk ... 

Enough. It was time to deal with the nightmare at hand. 

For the first time, I realized that the alien I had nicknamed Black Leather was no 
longer shooting at me. The reason why was sporadically visible up in the snowy air. The 
blue pulsing lights were mounted on a squadron of cop-hoppers coming out from the 
Highroad Authority barracks in Pickering. My surviving assailant now had other things 
on his mind besides the capture of Asahel Frost. He was probably hotfooting it back 
along the median catwalk to his limousine. If he had any brains at all, he'd already 
disposed of his Allenby stun-carbine through one of the drainage openings in the road 
shoulder. 

The eastbound lanes of cars were finally beginning to accelerate slightly. Their dark-
tinted side windows hid the occupants from my sight. Were the riders gaping at the scene 
beside the road as they glided by? Or had they done the sensible thing and activated their 
windows' projection option, substituting images of some pleasant landscape for the 
tedious reality of a creeping mass of vehicles bogged down on a stormy night? 

The fuzzy blue lights in the sky came closer. 

The cops were going to nab me. 

Black Leather would reach his limo safely, escape the traffic jam, and vanish into the 
unmonitored maze of country lanes around the Kawartha Lakes. Meanwhile, the 
Highroad Authority would haul me off to the nearest Justice Center. A media circus 
would strike up the band as I attempted to explain my abduction, my great escape, and 


my subsequent lethal brawl with a well-dressed individual—undoubtedly possessed of 
impeccable credentials—whose true nature and motivation I didn't dare reveal. 

Perhaps the police would believe I had acted in self-defense. Or they might just charge 
me with manslaughter. 

I waited numbly for spotlights to stab down from the hoppers. Nothing happened. 
Four aircraft sailed over the pylon and continued moving in the direction of the distant 
accident scene. 

I couldn't believe my luck. If the woman with the shattered windshield or any of the 
other motorists had reported shooting on the highroad, the news apparently had not yet 
been passed on by dispatchers to the cops in the air. 

Time to hit the trail, buckaroo. 

Adrenaline generated during the fight still kept me warm, but every bone in my body 
seemed to be aching, particularly my skull. I got up and started for the pylon platform, 
only to stop short as I realized what I was leaving behind: the only existing tangible 
evidence of a Haluk masquerading as a human being, evidence that had eluded me and 
my investigators for over three years. If I abandoned the demiclone corpse, it would 
almost certainly be taken to the closest county morgue. Brown Fleece's alien confederates 
would retrieve his remains with laughable ease. 

That wasn't going to happen if I could prevent it. 

I unzipped my anorak and rumbled for my pocket phone. Punched up the code that 
would connect me to the computer of my private hopper. I could program it to come and 
get me once I got down off the highroad. Even a few hundred meters away from the 
pylon the airspace would be unrestricted. 

The phone said, We are sorry. The code you have entered is temporarily ex-
operational. 

Rats! The damned Haluk must have sabotaged it, perhaps to make sure I didn't use the 
aircraft to escape their dragnet. My car was probably ex-op, too. 

Right. So I entered the personal code of my friend and associate Karl Nazarian. 

Karl was a charter Rampart Starcorp stakeholder and its first security chief at the 
operating HQ on the planet Seriphos in the Perseus Spur. My father made the huge 
mistake of putting him out to pasture after long years of service, installing a hotshot 
named Oliver Schneider in his place. Schneider sold out to Galapharma and became their 
main mole inside Rampart. 

I came along and drafted Karl Nazarian to assist in the search for my missing sister 
Eve. The veteran security man helped make that operation a success, and continued the 
good work in subsequent covert actions that culminated in the capture of the material 
witness Schneider and the indictment of Galapharma. Since then Karl had shared my 
private investigations of the Haluk. 

When Rampart became an Amalgamated Concern and I agreed to become Acting 
Chief Legal Officer, I saw to it that Karl was appointed Vice President for Special—i.e., 
spooky—Projects, a post that Simon had originally dragooned me into accepting. Karl 
reported only to me. During the pretrial phase of the Galapharma case, he supervised 
"discoveries" for my cadre of legal eagles, helping to organize—and edit—ultrasensitive 
pieces of evidence. When that work was done, he and his small staff of trustworthy 
cronies occupied themselves gathering information about the shady machinations of the 
big businesses that called themselves the Haluk Consortium. Not that I was in a position 


to do anything with the intelligence during the trial, other than pass on the juicier bits to 
Ef Sontag. 

Karl was the only person I would have trusted to do the delicate psychotronic 
interrogation of Lorne Buchanan. I'd confided my early hopes for the Barky Hunt to him, 
too. And now I desperately needed his help again. 

"Nazarian here." The gnarled face, like a topographic map of Armenia divided by a 
rocky cleaver of a nose, gazed at me from the phone screen. "Good God, Helly, you look 
like a drowned rat. A thoroughly buggered-up drowned rat." 

"I feel even worse. I'm sitting on the shoulder of the Ottawa Highroad in a snowstorm, 
next to the corpse of a Haluk demiclone." 

"That's fantastic! You're certain it's a Haluk?" 

"Absolutely. The demi's mine if I can sneak him out of here before the county 
mounties spot us. It could happen any minute. Can you come and do an evac in your 
hopper? Mine's ex-op." 

A shocked silence, then: "I'm not in Toronto Conurb. I'm nearly 1,200 kilometers 
away, out in the Kenora at Kingfisher Lodge." 

I knew what that had to mean. "Oh, shit—not Dan!" 

"I'm afraid so. Your brother flew the coop a couple of hours ago. He had help. Four of 
the six guards are dead. The survivors can't tell us much. The lodge just wasn't secured 
for a massive armed assault. An BMP blast took out the sensors and the rest of the 
electronics. A single large hopper carrying a dozen bandits did the job in less than ten 
minutes." 

"Karl, there's a good chance that Dan didn't escape. He might have been kidnapped by 
Haluk." 

"Christ!" 

"My sister Beth could also be in danger. The aliens might try to nab her, too. She'll 
need round-the-clock security." 

"I'll get InSec over to her place immediately. What kind of a cluster-fuck have we got 
going here?" 

"The situation is even worse than you might think. Earlier this evening two Haluk 
demiclones snatched me. Bold as brass. The bastards took me right off the Underground 
Path in the midst of the Friday night crush. They talked to each other about some plan 
involving Dan and maybe Beth. I couldn't make any sense of it. My knowledge of the 
Haluk language is too rusty. I managed to get out of their limousine when the Ottawa 
Highroad shut down with a multicar accident. One of the alien goons is with me here, 
stone cold dead on the tarmac. The other one skipped out." 

"Oh, boy. More demiclone operatives! Just what we were afraid those blue bastards 
would do—" 

"Listen, Karl. You know how vital it is for us to hang on to this corpse and get it to 
Bea Mangan for a genetic assay. But I can't use regular Rampart Security for transport. 
There's no way I could explain this situation to them. And if we're caught with the stiff, 
Rampart itself could face criminal charges. I killed the Haluk accidentally, in self-
defense, but body-snatching is a felony, and interfering with the scene of a fatality could 
lead to a charge of obstruction of justice, at the very least. You got any thoughts?" 

"You say you want to take the body to Mangan right away?" 

"I'll check with her first, but I know she won't have any scruples about cooperating. 


This is the break we've been waiting for. The smoking gun that proves the Haluk are 
infiltrating humanity." 

"Then call Bea herself for a lift," Karl advised. "Her place in Fenelon Falls is—
what?—only fifty klicks or so north of the highroad. She's sure to have a hopper at her 
disposal. Or her husband Charlie will." 

"Damn. I should have thought of that. The Haluk punched out my lights and I'm kinda 
nebular at the moment." 

"Is there anything else I can do to help?" 

I tried to think. It wasn't easy. "Cover me with Sean Callahan at Rampart Tower 
InSec. Just before the Haluk grabbed me down on the Path I phoned Sean and asked for 
help. He sent a situation team, but too late to do any good. Tell him I'm with you—that 
my emergency turned out to be a false alarm. He'll be suspicious, but there's nothing we 
can do about that." 

"Listen, Helly, if you can't reach Bea Mangan, call me again. I'll get to you, but it 
could take a while." 

"Let's hope it doesn't come to that. I think you should return to Toronto as soon as 
possible. We'd better meet at Bea's place. I don't want to go back to my apartment just 
yet. Haluk might have the place staked out. Hasta luego." I ended the call. 

The cold was beginning to get to me. My hood had come off again and melting snow 
ran from my hair into my two blackened eyes. I wiped them, cringing at the pain, pulled 
the hood up, and summoned Mangan's personal code from the dex. The phone buzzed. 

"Pick it up," I prayed. "Please, Bea." I stared at the small blank screen, shivering hard 
now, and waited. After five buzzes a robot voice asked me if I wished to continue my 
attempt to reach Beatrice Mangan directly, or if I wished to go to voice mail and leave a 
message. I told it, "Try again." The robot hadn't said she was unavailable; for some 
reason she just wasn't choosing to answer. Busy people did that all the time. 

The buzzes resumed, and every five seconds the artificial voice cut in again. I kept 
saying, "Try again," and watched the display that said STAND BY FOR CONNECTION. 
Snowflakes fell on me and the demiclone corpse, coating us with tiny points of light that 
sparkled in the sweeping car headlights. 

Beatrice Mangan, who held the rank of Chief Superintendent in the ICS Forensic 
Division, was a respected expert in molecular biology and the criminal aspects of genetic 
engineering. She was also an old friend from my days in the enforcement arm of the 
Interstellar Commerce Secretariat, one of the few people who had not believed the 
trumped-up charges that led to my disgrace and dismissal. 

I had drawn her into the Galapharma conspiracy almost from the beginning of my own 
involvement. She helped me to nail Bronson Elgar, Galapharma assassin and master of 
dirty tricks—who unfortunately proved to be completely human. Later, she'd continued to 
lend her expertise to my quest for evidence that Haluk demiclones were wearing 
Earthling bodies with nefarious intent. 

Bea had shared my frustration when every likely lead dug up by Karl and his 
associates petered away into failure or uncertainty. The efficient robotic cleaners so 
ubiquitous in modern society made it almost impossible to find castoff bits of 
incriminating DNA in starships or buildings that we knew had harbored faux humans. 
The biosamples Karl's people did manage to glean had been too badly damaged by 
mechanical housekeepers to be conclusive. 


But now I had a whole demiclone corpse for Bea to analyze—if she'd just answer her 
goddamn phone! 

All she had to do to prove conclusively that Fleece was a Haluk in disguise was take 
cellular material from him, run it through a fine-spectrum genome analyzer, and compare 
its DNA profile to the genetic marker data that Lorne Buchanan had just turned over to 
Efrem Sontag. By consulting the population database, she could also ascertain the 
identity of the human template who had been used to engineer Fleece's transformation. 
Along with our other evidence, the demiclone corpse would tangibly demonstrate to the 
Commonwealth Assembly that Haluk were infiltrating humanity. 

What Fleece's body wouldn't necessarily prove was malicious intent, although we 
could show that the Haluk leader had lied when he claimed that all of the living 
demiclones had gone to the Haluk Cluster to serve as goodwill ambassadors. Getting 
more concrete evidence of alien evil-doing might take a long time, unless— 

The interminable buzzing stopped. 

"Bea? Thank God! I'd about given up." 

"Helly?" a nonrobotic voice said. "That is you, isn't it? Your code is security-blanked 
and the video pickup on your phone isn't working very well." Bea Mangan's gentle round 
face, framed with a loosely wound turban of white toweling, smiled at me. She'd been 
taking a bath. 

"It's probably melted snow blurring the sensor. I'm sitting on the side of the Ottawa 
Highroad in a blizzard, and I have a wonderful present for you. The only catch is, you 
have to come and collect it—and me, too. Do you have a hopper available? I'm not far 
from the Clarington interchange." 

"Charlie and I can be there in fifteen minutes." 

"No. It would be best if your husband knew nothing about this—at least for the time 
being. It's a matter that relates to our... alien extracurricular activities." 

She stared in silence for a moment. "Tell me your exact location." 

I gave it to her, trying to keep my voice from quavering. "Bea? Bring along a thermos 
of hot coffee and an electric blanket, will you? Maybe some painkillers and antibiotic 
goop, too." 

"Oh, my. What have you been up to?" 

"We'll also need a body bag." I punched out using a frigid finger, the color of which 
closely approximated Haluk blue. 

I made one last phone call, to the voice-mail option of Efrem Sontag's ultrasecure 
private code, and left a request for him to allow Bea Mangan unlimited access to the 
computer files obtained from Lorne Buchanan. I told him I had finally obtained a valid 
biosample from a Haluk demiclone for Bea to analyze, but gave no other details. I asked 
him not to call me; I would call him. 

Then, groaning with the effort, I grasped Brown Fleece by the wrists. It took nearly all 
my dwindling strength to drag him to the pylon platform and get him through the 
emergency exit door onto the upper landing of the open spiral staircase. There was no 
way I could carry him down, but I'm not squeamish and Fleece was beyond caring, so I 
folded him over the stairwell railing and let him fall thirty meters to the bottom of the 
shaft. Then I lugged him off into the snow. 

We hid together in a nearby thicket, me shivering convulsively and he taking it easy, 
until Bea Mangan's hopper arrived. She was flying very low, without navigation lights, to 


avoid being seen from the highroad. Snow was falling thickly. I staggered out to greet 
her, arms wide, using my last erg of energy, and fell flat on my face. By then I was so 
deeply hypothermic that I suspect my internal temperature nearly matched Fleece's. Her 
scanner found me anyhow. 

She used an antigrav tote to hoist me into the aircraft's passenger compartment, 
stripped off most of my icy clothes, wrapped me in the electric blanket, and clamped my 
chilled fingers around a cup of steaming coffee. I made pitiful noises as the thawing 
process began. 

"You belong in a hospital, Helly. I'll call Charlie and he can have an ambulance—" 

"N-N-N-Noo!" I groaned, through chattering teeth. Her husband, Charles White, was a 
family practitioner in the small resort community of Fenelon Falls. He was aware that 
Bea had given me unofficial help gathering evidence of the Galapharma conspiracy, but 
he knew nothing about the Haluk demiclones. 

"I'm going to have Charlie look at you, whether you like it or not," she insisted 
stubbornly. "You need a full-body scan." 

Which would turn up the needle puncture in my calf and suspicious drug residuals in 
my blood. Perhaps Dr. White would have to be let in on the secret after all. 

"Go get your present, Bea." I jerked my head in the direction of the thicket. "Over 
under the little trees. Sorry if he's a trifle stinky." 

"First, you get dosed with analgesic. It may make you drowsy." 

She held a device tipped with a glass knob to my jugular. Ooh. Fly me to the moon. 
Then she smeared my damaged face and hands with antibiotic and pressed prickly bruise-
diffuse pads gently around my eyes. A not quite painful tingling ensued. I could feel the 
swelling begin to subside. 

"Feel better?" 

"Much. Got the body bag?" 

She nodded resignedly. "Who's the deceased?" 

"Don't know his name. But he's a genuine twenty-four karat totally authentic Haluk 
demiclone. I killed him... didn't mean to. Mighty convenient for a comprehensive DNA 
assay, though." 

"Jesus, Mary, and Joseph!" she said. 

"I don't think he's part of their congregation. Check with Great Almighty Luk." 

Bea was dressed in an orange snowmobiler's suit with a fur ruff around the hood. She 
slipped a pair of protective plastic mitts over her gloves and went to get the corpse. 

Pain free at last, I sipped caffeine-laden elixir and felt warmth and life seep back into 
my anatomy. In a few minutes Bea returned with the loaded tote floating behind her and 
stowed the sealed body bag in the hopper's cargo compartment. Then we lofted into the 
sky. She kept the running lights off and flew low until we were safely away from the 
highroad. 

I finished the coffee, drew the blanket close about me, and allowed myself a nasty 
smile, thinking about Black Leather. He'd have a hell of a lot of explaining to do once he 
reached Mount Julian. Not only had he lost me, but he'd also let his fellow demiclone fall 
into the hands of the one person in a position to do serious dirt to the alien cause. 

My eyes were drifting shut, but I resisted sleep. Something important about the town 
of Mount Julian ... What? 

Other thoughts swirled in my punchy mind: I'd have to leave Earth as soon as possible 


... stay out of reach of Haluk kidnappers and consortium thugs ... at Phlegethon, go in 
without giving away my identity ... disguised ... mustn't let Barky know I'm the guy who 
paid off Ram Mahtani... need some gimmick to get me close to him... trade goods... 
meanwhile, Karl works with Bea and Ef Sontag ... coordinates the search for my brother. 

Poor old Dan! Once, I was the prodigal son, he was the golden boy with high hopes of 
someday heading up Rampart. Now the Haluk had taken him— 

Suddenly, I thought I knew where. 

"Bea?" I mumbled. 

"Yes, Helly." 

"Do something very important for me. My phone ... inside pocket. Find Karl 
Nazarian's personal code in the dex. Call him as soon as you get to your house. Tell him 
you have me and the dead demiclone safe. Tell him... urgent he takes an armed security 
team to Alistair Drummond's former country home in Mount Julian. Place might be a 
hive of Haluk ... maybe they're taking my kidnapped brother Dan there ... old bastard 
himself might still be alive ... crazy as a bedbug, working with the blueberries. Tell Karl." 

"I'll tell him everything you said," Bea Mangan said, "even though it doesn't make 
much sense. Rest now, Helly. It's the best thing for you." 

So I did. 

—— 

I woke up in a quaintsy-poo guest room, tucked in a four-poster bed beneath a flowery 
comforter. I was wearing an honest-to-God flannel nightshirt, and there were small 
adhesive medical sensors stuck to my forehead, sternum, and inner left wrist, which I 
peeled off and dropped into the wastebasket. The old-style bedside alarm clock with 
external bells read 7:13. The turquoise pin from my neck scarf, my pocket phone, wallet, 
and wrist chronometer were there on a bedstand. I ascertained from the latter that it was 
Saturday evening. I'd just about slept the clock around. 

Rolling off the bed, I lurched over to the chintz-curtained windows and opened the 
blinds. Gray twilight. A soft rain was falling and the snow had all melted away. The 
cottage garden had patches of pink daffodils, purple and white crocuses with their petals 
clenched, and yellow forsythia bushes. Green-painted wrought-iron furniture stood on a 
patch of winter-sere lawn faintly tinged with new growth. Beyond a screen of balsams 
and budding maple trees, Sturgeon Lake was a silver glimmer beneath a cloudy sky. 

The bedroom door opened behind me. I turned around and there was Dr. Charles 
White, looking benign and reassuring in an open-necked shirt, khaki pants, and a tattered 
brown cardigan. He was a tall man, skinny as a rail, with skin the color of polished teak 
and eyes that were a startling sea-green. His tightly curled dark hair was worn in a 
sculptured style, with long sideburns like the cheekpieces on a Roman helmet. 

"Ah, Helly. So you're finally up and about." He pronounced it a-boot in the good old 
Canadian way. "The med monitors showed you perking along in fine fettle before you 
eighty-sixed the poor little things. How do you feel?" 

The mirror above the dresser showed me a sandy-srubbled face, slightly purplish-
green around the eyes, but unlikely to frighten timid toddlers. 

"Good enough. Thanks for the repair job, Charlie. I presume I'm pretty much okay?" 

"You're normal except for scabs on your knuckles and healing contusions. There'll be 
no lingering side effects from the paralyzing agent. The needle only grazed your calf, 
gave you a minimal dose." 


"Lucky me." I checked my bare shank. A faint red line was the only souvenir of my 
narrow escape. 

He tactfully didn't ask what kind of fine mess I'd gotten myself into this time. "Fresh 
clothes for you in the closet. Your business suit was ruined but the handmade cowboy 
boots survived with a little attention from the valet machine. The syringe puncture in the 
left boot is repaired. I've got supper downstairs, pizza and spinach-tomato salad. Karl and 
I have already eaten, but we'll keep you company with coffee and homemade German 
chocolate cake." 

"Pizza and salad would be marvelous, and you know I'm a sucker for Bea's cake. Is 
she here?" 

He shook his head. "She went to her lab in Commerce Tower to do some work. Don't 
worry about your deceased friend. I'm Deputy Coroner for Victoria County. The body is 
tucked away in our little hospital morgue with a John Doe tag on its toe, and none of the 
staff saw Bea and me bring it in. It'll be secure for as long as need be." 

I hesitated. "What did Bea tell you about the guy?" 

"That he drugged and kidnapped you. That he's important. That overzealous parties in 
the Secretariat for Xenoaffairs might try to take his body away, and we have to prevent 
that." 

"I didn't mean for you to get involved in this, Charlie. It could be a massive crock of 
shit." 

He shrugged and smiled and headed for the door. "Well, I'm involved. So don't worry 
about it." 

"Give me a few minutes to dress," I said. "I'll be right down." 

I shucked the nightshirt, emptied my bladder, slapped depilatory gel on my face, and 
had a quick shower. The clothes my host had provided were just my style: Levi's, a black 
roll-neck tee, and a red wool buffalo-plaid overshirt. 

Before I left the guest bedroom I entered Bea's personal code in my phone. She didn't 
answer. Then I called a guy named Cosmo Riendeau, the night supervisor at Rampart 
Fleet Maintenance at Oshawa Starport. For special consideration, he and his crew had 
been expediting the off-ticket refit of the good ship Makebate. 

"She's ready to rumble when you are, Helly," Riendeau told me cheerfully. "We 
tracked down an LRIR-1400J scanner for you in Chicago, scheduled to be installed in an 
Astrophysical Survey vessel. Bribery triumphed and it'll be here tomorrow. I tested the 
new dissimulator and weaponry systems myself. That buggy of yours is now one 
righteous bandit-killer." 

I resolved to send the perennially funds-strapped survey a replacement scanner, plus a 
corporate donation, as soon as possible. "The ship's gig all refitted, too?" 

"Absolutely. Extra shielding and new cannons. The provisions and the personal gear 
you ordered are stowed, and the fuel bunkers are topped. Makebate's new range is forty-
kay lights at a conservative fifty ross cruising pseudo-vee— twenty-eight thou if you put 
the pedal to the metal and exceed eighty. Of course, from now on you'll have to eat and 
sleep on the flight deck. The only accommodations we didn't rip out for the jumbo fuel-
cell installation were the captain's head and a little snack bar. It's gonna be pretty 
claustrophobic." 

Cosmo Riendeau and his team had no notion why I'd had the starship modified so 
radically. There had been no alternative when I conceived my aborted exploration of the 


Haluk Cluster, 17,200 light-years from the closest Rampart refueling depot in the Perseus 
Spur; but now the ship's extreme range gave me a tactical advantage in tracking Barky 
Tregarth to Zone 3. Normally, a Y-770 speedster like Make-bate would have been 
obliged to make three pit stops to cover the 9,600 lights to Phlegethon at top ross. 
Rampart owned no planets along the route to the inner galactic arm where I might have 
refueled with a reasonable expectation of confidentiality, and unfriendly folks would 
have been able to follow my progress easily if I'd used commercial facilities. But now I 
could approach Barky's world from a totally unexpected direction if I wanted to, with fuel 
to spare for the trip back to Earth. 

I said, "Nice going, Cosmo. There'll be a juicy bonus for you and the gang, subject to 
keeping zipped lips about the refit details per our original agreement." 

"Goes without saying," Riendeau said. "That's a joke." 

I gave an obligatory chuckle. "One final thing: Have you or your people noticed any 
outsiders poking around the shop during the past couple of days, maybe asking questions 
about when my ship would be ready?" 

"Nobody came during the night shift. I can check the day and swing crews. Call you 
back." 

"Do that. And get hold of Monte Gill at Fleet Security and tell him to post armed 
guards at Makebate's bay until I fly her out of there." 

"You got 'em." 

I thanked Riendeau and ended the call, then went downstairs to the cottage kitchen. 
Through the window, a Rampart hopper was visible on the pad beyond the rainswept 
garden: Karl Nazarian's ride. He was sitting at the table with Charlie White, drinking 
coffee. A delicious-looking cake, only minimally dissected, sat on a platter covered with 
a glass dome. 

"You look pretty decent, considering," Karl said. 

"There's nothing wrong with me that food won't fix." 

"Drink lots of water, too," Charlie ordered. He had already laid out the salad and a 
pitcher of icewater, and he now took a plate holding three huge wedges of steaming 
pepperoni pizza out of the microwave and gave it to me. 

"Yes, Doctor. Thank you, Doctor." I picked up a dripping slice, corraled the cheese 
strings, and started chomping. Even warmed over, it was very good. I was both famished 
and thirsty. 

Karl said, "A few things happened while you were sleeping." 

Charlie gave us a tactful look. "Why don't I let you two discuss your business in 
private." 

"Don't go," I said. "You're part of the Baker Street Irregulars now by virtue of the 
body-snatching. Accessory to a felony. You might as well know the rest of the story. Just 
let me get an update on current events from Karl first." 

The doctor nodded and sat down again. He uncovered the cake, cut three generous 
pieces, and passed them around. 

Karl said to me, "Your sister Beth is safe. She hasn't left her house. I personally told 
her that Dan had escaped with the help of unknown confederates, and she seemed 
genuinely surprised. Pleased, at first, but the fact that four of Dan's InSec guards were 
killed cooled her jets a little. She's promised not to go to the media or otherwise impede 
our investigation. I suspect she might be rethinking Big Brother's protestations of 


innocence." 

I doubted it. "We'll have to keep Beth well guarded or even get her offworld. The two 
Haluk thugs who bagged me last night had some sort of plans for her ... What about Dan 
himself? Did you check out Alistair Drummond's old place in Mount Julian?" 

Karl's expression turned grim. "I had a Rampart incident team hop over there as soon 
as Bea called me last night. They were there within an hour. By then the firefighters had 
pretty much gotten things under control." 

I yelped around a mouthful of pizza. "A fire—" 

"The big old wood-frame main house was totally destroyed, right down to the 
foundations. The battalion chief said the place went up like a bomb. It must have 
happened just about the time you first contacted me from the highroad. There were no 
human remains found. Or Haluk. A sophisticated accelerant that generated a very high-
temperature burn was used to torch the house. All that's left is white ash and slag." 

"Damn! The demi who got away must have sounded the alarm. A fire would have 
ensured that there were no bits and pieces of incriminating DNA left behind." 

"I went out to the scene myself this morning and interviewed the arson investigation 
people. Talked to the neighbors—such as there are in an upscale area like that. The 
property has extensive grounds, a wooded perimeter with a security fence, beam-guarded 
frontage on Stony Lake. It's not easy for unauthorized persons to get close to it. The 
adjacent homes are owned by wealthy types or corporations that use them mostly in 
summer. No one saw anything unusual immediately preceding the fire. Of course, there 
was a minor blizzard raging at the time. A caretaker woman who lives in a place half a 
kilometer down the shore says the house was inhabited for at least the past two months. 
She thought she might have seen a hoppercraft landing on the property yesterday 
afternoon, when the weather was better." 

"Who's the owner of record?" I asked. 

"Livonia Holdings SC, a Carnelian subsidiary, bought it from Galapharma after 
Alistair Drummond's death. About a year ago Livonia leased the place to S'yoma tib 
Katatosi—a Y'tata trading company—after installing a heavy-duty ventilation system. 
The Y's wanted it for an executive vacation retreat. An entity that I reached at the Y'tata 
embassy claims that the Katatosi outfit is only sporadically in residence on Earth. 
Conveniently absent at present. The entity was of the opinion that Katatosi might have 
sublet the house to some human business clients. The place was automatically supplied 
with food and the like by RoboGrocer and kept clean by Livonia-programmed domestic 
bots. There was no live-in human help." 

"Uh-huh. What about the security system?" 

"That fed to a Y outfit in Toronto that alerted the local fire crew. The Y'tata security 
entities refused to give me any specifics." 

"This suggestion of a Y'tata-Haluk connection could be significant, Karl. When I 
talked to Jake Silver about the Barky Hunt Friday night, he told me about a suppressed 
ZP report about collaborating pirates of the same two races operating in Zone 3, hijacking 
transactinide carriers." 

"Zone 3?" Karl's expression was incredulous. "Haluk in the Sagittarius Whorl? That 
doesn't sound likely." 

"I didn't think so, either. But Jake's source said that the Haluk presence was 
deliberately hushed up by Xenoaffairs. Maybe the blueballs are encouraging Y'tata 


freebooters to steal ultraheavy elements so that there'll be a shortage." 

"To increase the profitability of their own trans-ack trade with us?" 

"Maybe. Barky Tregarth is supposed to be hanging out in Zone 3, too. Jake got me a 
solid lead on him that I intend to check out as soon as possible. If the Haluk are operating 
in the Sag, I'll bet Barky knows about it." 

"There's more bad news," Karl said, "maybe unconnected to this business. Lorne 
Buchanan is dead. Apparently a suicide." 

"My God! The secret Galapharma file data—" 

"Relax. Everything pertaining to the Haluk was transferred to Efrem Sontag on Friday 
evening, just as Buchanan had agreed. His body was found Saturday morning in his 
Rosedale house. There was no note. He had apparently shot himself in the head with an 
antique Glock handgun." 

"The poor bastard didn't kill himself," I declared. "You know that as well as I do, 
Karl! The Haluk found out what he'd done and murdered him. Maybe to discourage other 
Galapharma executives from coming forward with evidence against them." 

"We'll never prove it." 

"Probably one of those security people Buchanan brought to Rampart Tower—" I 
started to say. 

"Any demis in the bunch will be long gone by the time we're able to check their DNA. 
It's a dead end, Helly. Now that they know we can spot them with the genetic marker, 
they'll be ultracautious." 

"Shit. I hoped we'd be able to keep the Haluk in the dark about that—at least for a 
little while longer." 

The good doctor had been looking more and more dismayed as the mystifying two-
way conversation proceeded. I said, "Charlie, it's about time we put you into the picture." 

He said, "Did I understand you to say that Haluk were responsible for your abduction 
yesterday? And for Buchanan's murder?" 

"Yep. They probably kidnapped my brother Daniel, too." 

"That's appalling! Why haven't you notified the Secretariat for Xenoaffairs?" 

"Because SXA is hand in glove with the consortium and the other members of the 
Hundred Concerns who have a vested interest in keeping the Haluk happy. SXA knows 
very well that I have a hard-on for our devious blue brethren. As we lawyers would say, I 
am not a credible accusant." 

"Then inform CCID—" 

"There's something else, Charlie. Bea's probably working to prove it even as we speak. 
The Haluk who tried to nab me were demiclones. They had been illegally engineered into 
perfect human replicas." 

"What! And the dead man in my morgue—" 

"Is almost certainly an alien. Bea will know for certain when she finishes her genetic 
assay. The Haluk have been using demiclones as secret agents against humanity for 
several years now—predating their treaties with us." 

"I can't believe that no one in authority knows about this!" 

"People in Xenoaffairs and Interstellar Commerce almost certainly have proof of 
demiclone activity on Earth and on other human worlds that they've concealed from the 
public and the Commonwealth Assembly. But no one in SXA or ICS will blow the 
whistle because high officials in both secretariats are creatures of Big Business. Mustn't 


endanger the profits of the Haluk Consortium." 

I'd finished the pizza and salad, and now I started on the slab of German chocolate 
cake. "Let me tell you the story, Charlie. It's a real seven-ply gasser." 

—— 

The scheme was hatched from a miscegenation of deluded idealism and corporate 
greed. It started with a crackpot idea conceived by a naive woman who hoped to foment 
peace and love between the Haluk and humanity by means of genetic engineering. 

Emily Blake Konigsberg was a brilliant and very attractive scientist who worked for 
Galapharma in the years before its unscrupulous CEO decided to take over the Rampart 
worlds. Emily and Alistair Drummond became lovers. In the course of their pillow talk 
she told him about her great dream. 

Emily was keenly interested in the Haluk and deplored the fact that our two races were 
enemies. As you know, the Haluk bitterly resented the fact that we halted their aggressive 
expansion into the Perseus Spur, forced them to accept a humiliating armistice, and 
declined to share our advanced technology with them. It was Emily's belief that the 
refusal of the Haluk to even consider detente was largely rooted in their envy of our 
stable physiology. She was probably right. 

Humanity was spawned on a relatively benign planet. Aside from some relatively 
minor seasonal glitches, we're physically and mentally operational all year round. But the 
Haluk evolved on a world with a highly eccentric orbit that annually carried it into a 
region of intense solar radiation. The result was allomorphy, an adaptation that originally 
enabled the race to survive. 

For about two hundred days each year, while the home planet was sufficiently distant 
from its sun, the ancestral Haluk existed as smart, active, sexual, somewhat humanoid 
individuals called gracilomorphs. But then, as the orbiting world approached the zone of 
strong solar radiation, Haluk bodies underwent protective changes. For about sixty days, 
during their lepidodermoid phase, they became increasingly thick-skinned and sluggish. 
They lost their sexuality. Their brains began to power down, leaving them incapable of 
high mental function. Finally, in a climactic Big Change, the lepidos morphed into a 
coffinlike testudinal phase. They slept inside radiation-resistant golden chrysalids for 140 
days. When the home planet once again swung away from its ferocious sun, gracile 
Haluk awakened from estivation and emerged from their protective shells to carry on 
their interrupted lives. 

Eventually the Haluk achieved interstellar travel. On new planets, allomorphy was no 
longer a survival trait but instead a tremendous inconvenience that slowed racial 
progress. Millennia passed. As the Haluk expanded throughout their star-cluster, the 
allomorphic cycles of individuals lost their ancestral synchrony. This lessened the annual 
nuisance somewhat. At least they weren't all asleep at the same time. But their 
civilization—and most particularly their science—suffered a great disadvantage 
compared to that of other stargoing sapients. 

Especially humans. 

The Haluk entered the Milky Way Galaxy at the tip of the Perseus Spur and 
established eleven colonial planets. At the time, the only local race having starships were 
the Qastt, and they were easily subjugated. But when humanity extended its powerful 
hegemony to the Spur, Haluk expansion was stopped cold by our superior technology. 

So they hated and feared us and refused to trade or enter into normal diplomatic 


relations. 

Emily Konigsberg told her lover, Drummond, that she was convinced Haluk hostility 
could be mitigated and the race's great potential realized if their allomorphy were to be 
eradicated. It was her opinion that the job could be done easily through advanced 
techniques of genetic engineering. She sincerely believed that Commonwealth policy 
denying this technology to the Haluk was immoral. If Galapharma Concern could see its 
way clear to bypass CHW strictures—that is, work with her to set up genen therapy 
programs among the blue aliens—a great wrong would be righted. 

Alistair Drummond didn't have an altruistic bone in his body, but he liked 
Konigsberg's idea all the same. The Haluk Cluster was rumored to possess abundant 
supplies of valuable transactinide elements, which the aliens had heretofore adamantly 
refused to trade. Galapharma stood to make enormous profits in the therapy venture, 
doing well by doing good. 

So Alistair entered into secret negotiations with the Haluk leader, the Servant of 
Servants of Luk, and the deal was done. Emily set up a genetic engineering lab on the 
principal Haluk Spur colony, Artiuk, staffed entirely by Galapharma personnel. The 
project achieved success by inserting human genes into the Haluk. Modified alien 
individuals remained in the active, brainy, gracile phase permanently. And because the 
therapy also modified Haluk germ cells—so did their offspring. 

The great achievement was doubly illegal under Commonwealth law, which forbade 
meddling with the genetic heritage of a sovereign race, to say nothing of sharing human 
DNA with aliens. This didn't bother Alistair Drummond. Galapharma was one of the 
almighty Big Seven Concerns. He figured that if they were caught, they could pressure 
the Commonwealth Assembly to legalize the scheme retroactively since it was good for 
business. 

Eventually, that's just what happened. 

It was a minor embarrassment to Emily Konigsberg that the only viral vector suitable 
for allomorph eradication therapy was not one under patent to Galapharma Amalgamated 
Concern. PD32:C2 was an exclusive product of Gala's small rival, Rampart Starcorp, 
which had obtained the CHW mandate to the Perseus Spur after Galapharma withdrew in 
2176. The vector could not be grown under laboratory conditions or synthesized; its sole 
source was the planet Cravat, owned by Rampart. 

PD32:C2 could be purchased on the open market, of course—cautiously, so Rampart 
would not know that the stuff was being resold at an enormous markup—or it could be 
stolen. Gala agents and Haluk pirates pursued both courses of action, while Alistair 
Drummond tried to engineer a hostile takeover of Rampart in order to regain control of 
the Spur planets—especially Cravat—that Galapharma had so imprudently let slip out of 
its hands. 

At the same time, the wily CEO encouraged other large Concerns—Sheltok, 
Carnelian, Bodascon, and Homerun— to join the illicit Haluk trading partnership. There 
was safety in numbers, and plenty of profits to go around. The Haluk were hungry for all 
kinds of advanced human technology and willing to pay through the nose. 

Emily and Alistair were no longer romantically involved. Her idealistic pursuit of a 
"greater good" allowed her to turn a blind eye to the commercial shenanigans 
orchestrated by her ex-lover while she expanded the therapy program, training Haluk 
scientists to build and operate dynamic stasis units. The aliens were very quick learners. 


Too damn quick—but none of the human conspirators had any inkling of the awful 
truth. 

One day the Servant of Servants of Luk proposed a new genetic enterprise to Emily. 
He had conceived a plan that would open a great new era in Haluk-human relations. Its 
fulfillment required "a small number" of demiclones. These Haluk in human guise were 
to become special cultural envoys to the populous planets of the Haluk Cluster, 
supposedly soothing the intense xenophobia that had poisoned any hope of 
rapprochement between the two races from the time of their first encounter over a 
hundred years earlier. 

Emily Konigsberg was dubious about this bizarre notion. Demicloning, like other 
extreme forms of genetic engineering, had long been outlawed in the Commonwealth of 
Human Worlds. But eventually she gave in to the Servant's pressure and even contributed 
her own DNA to the project. 

When Alistair Drummond found out about the demiclones, he was furious. He 
believed the Servant actually intended to use fake humans to spy on the Concerns and 
gain trade advantages. Drummond's first inclination was to shut down the demiclone 
project, but he relented after the Servant hinted that serious consequences would ensue. 
By then, illegal trade with the Haluk had generated immense profits that Galapharma and 
its Concern collaborators were reluctant to forfeit. 

Drummond hatched a ploy to minimize the danger of industrial espionage. He ordered 
Konigsberg to incorporate a genetic marker into the demiclone procedure without Haluk 
knowledge. In addition, the sole genen facility producing the clones was placed under 
strict human supervision, on a remote human world. Galapharma itself undertook to 
supply the luckless donors of human DNA. 

Alistair Drummond's precautions worked well enough ... until the aliens learned how 
to perform the complex demiclone procedure without the help of human scientists, built 
secret labs of their own, and discovered how easy it was to defeat the sporadic DNA 
testing of employees that was supposed to prevent Haluk ringers from infiltrating the 
human race. 

—— 

As I reached this point in my narrative, my pocket phone trilled. It was Cosmo 
Riendeau. I excused myself from the table and went to answer the call in the cottage's 
living room, urging Karl to continue the story while I was gone. 

Cosmo's report was disturbing. "Only one outsider took an interest in your starship, 
Helly—a very pretty young woman from the accounting department in Rampart Tower. 
She showed up here in Oshawa yesterday, around noon, and apparently had the proper 
pass and personal ID. This cutie told Ole Wiren, the day-shift supervisor, that she was at 
the port to reconfigure a billing procedure for our number crunchers. She said she was on 
lunch break and ever so curious about the big starships, and she begged Ole for a quick 
tour. He admits he came down with instant beaver fever and showed her around." 

"She saw Makebate." 

"I'm afraid so. Your boat was obviously something special—not just another freighter 
or ExSec cruiser. Ole told her your starship was almost ready to leave the barn—even let 
slip that we'd done a fuel-cell augmentation. Sorry, Helly. The whole team knew your 
refit was supposed to be hush-hush, but that chick played poor Ole like a Stradivarius." 

"Probably no harm done," I lied. "Did the woman give her name?" 


"Dolores da Gama. I pulled her image and voice-signature off the shop entry security 
monitor for you. Hold on while I feed a dime." 

He inserted a data disklet into his phone and a talking image popped onto my screen. 
Da Gama was stacked like a brick shithouse and had wide-set dark eyes, pouty lips, and 
long black hair with a white blaze at the left temple. She talked her way past the laxly 
guarded entrance to Rampart Fleet Maintenance using a voice as sweet and seductive as 
fireweed honey. If Dolores was a demiclone, her original must have been a real hottie. 

I cut off the replay. "Thanks for the information, Cosmo. I'll look into this, but I'm 
sure everything's okay." 

"Anything else I can do for you, Helly?" 

"I'd like to lift off sometime early next week. Think you'd have time to rig simple arm 
and leg restraints on the copilot's chair—plus an exterior lock on the John door?" 

"Prisoner transport, eh?" 

"Something like that." 

"I'll attend to it personally." 

I thanked him and hit the End pad, then used the phone to access Rampart's roster of 
accounting personnel. 

There was no Dolores da Gama. Why wasn't I surprised? 

I sent a copy of her mug shot to Sean Callahan at InSec and told him to pass it along to 
his supervisor. I doubted that the lovely lady would press her luck and try another 
incursion, but Rampart Tower's doorkeepers had to be put on alert. 

And I had to get out of town before a fresh set of demiclone thugs came sniffing after 
me. 

However, there was still unfinished business to be taken care of with Simon, Ef 
Sontag, and a few other people. I also needed to assemble certain items crucial to a 
successful Barky Hunt that probably wouldn't be available off-Earth. 

I sat for a few minutes, thinking, then made two brief calls. The first was to Tony 
Becker, Rampart's brilliant but testy Vice President for Biotechnology, who grumped and 
bitched and asked questions that I didn't intend to answer. He only agreed to put together 
what I needed when I used both a carrot and a stick: the promise of a hefty bribe, plus a 
half-joking threat to have him fired if he didn't come through. 

The second call went to Halimeda Opper, a venerable and trustworthy Reversionist 
party stalwart who was a media production designer by profession. She heard me out, 
then referred me to a theatrical supply house in Mississauga that would have exactly what 
I required. 

—— 

I returned to the kitchen and helped myself to a second piece of German chocolate 
cake. Next to snickerdoodle cookies and rozkoz flan, it's my favorite confection. Karl 
was regaling Charlie with accounts of our more recent adventures with the Haluk—
demiclone and au naturel—on Dagasatt and on the journey back to Earth following my 
capture of Oliver Schneider. I lowered my eyes modestly during the heroic parts, which 
seemed a lot more fun in retrospect than they'd been at the time. 

When Karl wound down, Charlie said, "I'm still not clear on the aliens' motivation. 
Trade between humanity and the Haluk is regularized. On the face of it, we're friends. So 
why the continuing demiclone espionage?" 

"Why indeed," I murmured. "Perhaps the Haluk have a hidden agenda that involves 


more than taking care of business. Perhaps they've had that agenda from the inception of 
the demiclone scheme! What if their moles have dug deep into the inner operations of the 
Hundred Concerns? What if they're rooting around inside our scientific establishment, 
our law enforcement agencies, and our government?" 

"To what end?" He asked the question, but an intelligent man like Charlie White had 
to know the answer already. I spelled it out anyhow. 

"Maybe the Haluk aren't willing to wait patiently while the Commonwealth Assembly 
doles out small numbers of new Milky Way worlds for them to colonize. I have this 
theory that population pressure back in the Haluk Cluster is dire—otherwise, why would 
they have made the desperate and difficult step of jumping to our galaxy in the first 
place? The only Spur colony of theirs I ever visited seemed conspicuously lacking in 
elbow room. The school I toured was jam-packed with youngsters. Now that allomorphy 
can be eradicated in the germ line, parents no longer pass on the allomorph trait to their 
offspring. Pretty soon everybody'll be wide awake back there in the Haluk Cluster, as 
well as in their Spur colonies. If they already have an overpopulation problem, doing 
away with allomorphy will make that problem worse." 

"You believe the Haluk intend to seize planets in our galaxy by force?" Charlie said. 

"I think it's a strong possibility. So do Karl and Bea and a few other voices crying in 
the wilderness." 

"The difficulty," Karl interposed, "has been proving Haluk hostile intent beyond a 
shadow of a doubt. Placing concrete evidence before the Commonwealth Assembly so 
the matter must be openly debated—not swept under the rug, the way the Hundred 
Concerns and corrupt elements in SXA and ICS would prefer. Up until now, we've never 
even been able to prove conclusively that demiclones exist." 

Charlie said, "The body in my morgue—" 

"Is a corpus delicti," I said. "The legal meaning of that term has nothing to do with a 
cadaver. It means 'the body of the crime'—the substantial proof that an illegal act has 
been committed." 

Charlie nodded slowly. His lucent green eyes had a detached thousand-meter stare, 
looking into a future almost too alarming to contemplate. "If only the Haluk weren't so 
intelligent! It's said that they haven't simply purchased our high technology—they've 
improved on it." 

"That's a fact." Karl looked bleak as he cut himself another hunk of cake. It was 
almost gone. "Some of their star-ships are equal to the best we have. Most are inferior. 
But the technology gap will close as they obtain advanced production machinery from us. 
There's still an embargo against selling weapons to the Haluk, but you know how 
effective that will be. Gunnmning to the Insaps is a fine old human institution, 
tremendously profitable." 

"They'll wage war on us," I said, "unless we expose their hostile intent. Force them to 
allow human inspection of their worlds on pain of full trade interdiction." 

"Force them?" Charlie White exclaimed. "In heaven's name, how?" 

"I'm working on it," I said. 

"Do the Haluk know that?" 

"Probably," I admitted. 

"Maybe that's why they tried to kidnap you," Charlie said. 

I'd pretty much come to the same conclusion. "Yeah. But I'm damned if I can figure 


why they didn't just kill me outright. Why take me alive? I don't have possession of the 
crucial evidence against them. Efrem Sontag does, and he'll back up the data and secure it 
so immaculately that not even I can touch it. It's still too early in the game for us to have 
finalized our anti-Haluk strategy, so I can't spill any great secrets under psychotronic 
interrogation. And why would they need to snatch my brother Dan and sister Beth along 
with me?" 

Charlie just shook his head. 

Outside, the shades of night had fallen. Patio lights gleamed in the rain and reflected 
on the smooth sides of Karl's big hoppercraft. I ate the last piece of chocolate cake. 

Charlie made fresh coffee and we sat around drinking it and waiting, not saying much. 

Finally, about 2100 hours, Bea Mangan's hopper wafted down and parked beside 
Karl's. She came in through the back door, looking tired but pleased with herself, and 
dropped a magslate on the table in front of me. "Here's the report, Helly. I've already sent 
a copy of it to Delegate Son-tag." 

Charlie helped his wife off with her coat, heated water, and put a couple of peppermint 
teabags into a big china cup labeled C10H19OH. I pulled out a chair for Bea and 
apologized for the fact that we'd scoffed up all the cake. She said she'd eaten supper at the 
cafeteria in Commerce Tower. After she had relaxed for a few minutes and sipped some 
of the calming brew, I asked the pertinent question. 

"What did your genetic assay show? Speak freely. Charlie knows the score now." 

Bea gave me a reproachful look. "Helly, I thought we—" 

I said, "Your husband is in this thing up to his neck, just like the rest of us. He 
deserves to know what's really going on." 

"It's for the best," Charlie said to her. "At least now I know the importance of that bod 
stashed in my morgue under false pretenses." 

"So—is he a demiclone?" I asked Bea. 

"He is," she said, "provided the data Lorne Buchanan sent to Sontag are correct. The 
so-called marker incorporated by Emily Konigsberg is actually a unique suite of 
introns— multiple noncoding sequences of DNA—occurring on four different 
chromosomes, plus a single mutant exon from the complex controlling telomeric 
proteins. The genetic profile of the individual you nicknamed Brown Fleece contains 
both the intron suite and the mutant exon typical of demiclones." 

"What are telomeric proteins?" I asked. 

Dr. Charlie said, "Telomeres are ribbonlike appendages on the ends of chromosomes. 
Each time a cell divides—and those in the normal human body split about seventy times 
before kicking the bucket—the telomeres diminish a little. Youthful cells have long telos. 
Old worn-out cells have shorter ones. Tinkering with the genes that influence telo 
proteins is one of the important ways that dystasis therapy brings about cell rejuvenation 
and healing. There's an enormous scientific literature on the subject." 

Bea said, "Brown Fleece's telomeres seem to be of an appropriate length for a human 
male of his apparent age. It's quite possible that the exon mutation's effect is negligible." 

I frowned. "Then why would Konigsberg bother to include it in the demiclone marker 
group at all? Wouldn't the intron suite adequately label fake humans?" 

"It would," she said. "Emily was forced to include the exon—for a very odd reason 
that I'm going to tell you about." 

"What does this mutant thing do?" Karl asked. 


"Apparently nothing," Bea said, "if we're to judge by Brown Fleece. In the biosample I 
briefly studied, the telomeric proteins seem completely normal." 

"Isn't there any way to check it out more intensively?" I asked. 

"One would have to do some rather time-consuming research," she said, "in vitro 
tissue culture of cells from different parts of the demiclone body—artificial acceleration 
of cell division to determine whether the overall aging process or specific bodily 
functions were being significantly affected. Perhaps the exon is a protogene—one that's 
effectively dormant until it's switched on by some external factor. In that case, a 
researcher might not uncover the mutation's effect unless she found the relevant trigger. 
Perhaps Haluk scientists have already noticed this rogue exon and researched it. 
However, given their relative backwardness in molecular biology, I'd be inclined to doubt 
it." 

"Me, too," I said. All this was more genetics than I really wanted to hear about right 
now, even though I suspected it might be important. 

Bea took a long drink of the mint tea and sighed. "Let's move on to the other 
interesting—and very puzzling—thing I discovered. Do you remember the Haluk cadaver 
that was sent to Tokyo University by Rampart? This happened several years ago, just 
before Eve was abducted." 

Karl and I nodded. I explained to Charlie: "The body was a gracile. It looked like a 
normal allomorph, but it wasn't. It had human DNA mixed with the Haluk. During the 
long period of hostility, human researchers had very little opportunity to study the Haluk 
genome. So when Rampart captured a Qastt pirate vessel that had a Haluk suicide aboard, 
it sold the body to Tokyo University for a nice price. That particular corpse unexpectedly 
provided the first proof that Haluk allomorphism was being erased by unauthorized genen 
therapy. Bea had it briefly but was unable to do much research." 

"That's right," she said. "The body was returned to the Haluk as a provision of the new 
trade treaty, supposedly for religious interment. The Secretariat for Xenoaffairs 
confiscated and sealed the Japanese researchers' data and mine for policy reasons that 
weren't made clear to the scientific community ... Perhaps you don't know that officially 
the Haluk genome remains pegged at its pre-allomorph-trait eradication status. Fresh 
research by human scientists into Haluk biology is now allowed only with SXA 
permission. And no permits have been issued." 

I gave a cynical smile. "Right. The Haluk—and our goddamn government—don't want 
to publicize the fact that human genes were used illegally to wipe out allomorphism. 
That's why the Tokyo study was never published. My father obtained a precis of it by 
twisting academic arms, but the full report was quashed." 

"Nevertheless," Bea said demurely, "I managed to obtain a copy of it two years ago, as 
did a number of other people in my line of work. Today, when I finished assaying Brown 
Fleece, I compared his genetic profile to that of the Tokyo Haluk. I did this for technical 
reasons, to see how much of the redundant human DNA in the Tokyo body might have 
survived in a demiclone. Of course, the Toyko Haluk didn't contain the intron marker 
suite typical of demiclones ... but the body did have the mutant telomere exon." 

"What the hell does that mean?" I demanded. I was beginning to feel very confused. 
All this science was giving me a headache—or perhaps it was too much German 
chocolate cake. 

Bea said, "I think we can presume that every nonallomorphic Haluk possesses this 


small exon mutation. Older studies of Haluk genetics confirm that the altered gene is not 
present in Haluk possessing the allomorph trait. Nor has the mutation ever been noted in 
human beings. I have to conclude that the exon is an artifact. Emily Konigsberg created 
it." 

Karl's bushy brows rose quizzically. "She added a little something extra to both the 
trait eradication and the demiclone genen procedures?" 

"Apparently so," Bea said, "but there's no documentation for it in her research 
materials. I haven't been able to read everything in the secret Galapharma files yet, of 
course. But there was an extensive section dealing with allotrait eradication that I did 
study carefully. I found no reference to insertion of the mutant exon. Konigsberg must 
have concealed it within another gene-resequencing procedure, keeping it secret from 
both Haluk authorities and the Galapharma technicians. Later, when the demiclone 
project was established, she was forced to describe the mutant exon in the marker group. 
It would be detectable, you see, when Gala checked its employees' DNA to be sure they 
weren't Haluk spies." 

And a mighty sloppy job they did of that, too ... 

"So Emily's magic exon occurs in nonallos and demiclones both," I said, "and we have 
no notion why. Aren't most mutations harmful?" 

"Not necessarily," Bea said. "Given the highly idealistic temperament of Konigsberg, 
it doesn't seem likely that the exon would be deleterious. She wouldn't want to harm her 
Haluk friends. The mutation is probably neutral—or even beneficial." 

"For who?" I murmured. "Humans or Haluk?" 

A silence. 

Finally, I said, "This new information bugs the hell out of me. What if that damned 
woman figured out a way to increase the Haluk lifespan, or make them super-healing, or 
something?" 

"That's extremely unlikely," Bea said mildly. "But I could discreetly consult my 
forensic colleagues. Perhaps some of them would agree to quietly undertake some tissue-
culture experiments, using biosamples from Brown Fleece. They wouldn't have to know 
the subject was a Haluk demiclone in order to investigate the effects of the mutation." 

"Go ahead," I said. "But for God's sake stress the need for secrecy." 

"I don't think we have to worry about their discretion." She paused. "However, there's 
another kind of secrecy we should be very concerned about. Have you considered that 
there might be demiclone spies in Efrem Sontag's office? His association with you and 
his skeptical attitude toward the Haluk Consortium are well-known." 

"Sontag and his staff and even his family will have to be vetted," I said. "He's already 
agreed to it. We'll obtain DNA samples without the other subjects' knowledge and you 
can do the assays." I glanced apologetically at Karl and Charlie. "You'll have to test us, 
too, Bea." 

"Oh, I've already done that, Helly." She smiled into her cup of peppermint tea. "I took 
biosamples from you to the lab and compared them with the Vital Stat database. You 
three are absolutely authentic. But I'm afraid you'll have to take me on faith—at least for 
the time being." "We'll risk it," I said. 

—— 

Not long afterward, Karl and I boarded his hopper and took off into the rainy night 
sky. For no reason other than an old security chief's love of arcane gadgetry, he had 


installed a sophisticated intruder-defense system in his small home in Port Perry, south of 
Fenelon Falls. It was the kind of setup that would hold off even the most determined 
Haluk kidnappers, far superior to that in my Rampart Tower apartment. I asked Karl if I 
could stay with him, and he readily agreed. He was a widower and lived alone except for 
a ten-kilo purebred, bluepoint Ragdoll cat named Max. The cat even liked me. 

"It'll just be for three days," I said, "while we work out a long-range game plan with 
Sontag based on all this new evidence. After that, I'm off to a Sagittarian asteroid named 
Phlegethon. Barky Tregarth is supposed to be holed up there—literally. The friggin' place 
is an orbiting rabbit warren. Hollow." 

Karl turned in the pilot's seat and regarded me with amazement. "But you can't go 
now—not after what's happened!" 

"Sure I can." I was scrolling through the hopper's music library. Mostly classical, 
dammit, and heavy on Khachaturian. Finally, I found a Cal Tjader collection and called 
up "Running Out." Apropos, no? 

"You're needed here!" Karl protested. 

"No, I'm not. You need Cassius Potter, Hector Motlaletsie, and Lotte Dietrich." They 
were the retired Rampart security agents who had worked closely with us in the Perseus 
Spur during the Galapharma takeover attempt. The three were among the few people 
fully cognizant of the Haluk demiclone threat. 

"My Over-the-Hill Gang?" 

"Sign 'em on again," I told him. "They'll come running if you explain the situation. 
We're going to need Lotte's computer expertise to analyze the archival material we got 
from Lorne Buchanan. She'll know how to validate its authenticity for Sontag, in case 
SXA tries to discredit the chain of evidence later. Cassius and Hector will have an even 
more sensitive mission: collecting biosamples from every Delegate in the Commonwealth 
Assembly. They should all be tested. So should as many of the Delegates' aides as we can 
grab DNA from. If any demiclones are found, we leave them in place—then let Sontag 
blow 'em sky-high when he starts his committee hearings." 

"You should be here for those. You've got to be here! You're a principal witness." 

"My Barky Hunt won't take long. Maybe not even two weeks. Five days to reach 
Phlegethon, maybe a few more to track the old gunrunner down and hook him up to the 
truth machines I'm packing on Makebate. If he comes up aces, I'll transmit the results of 
his interrogation to you immediately via encrypted subspace com, then hightail it back to 
Earth with Barky lashed to the copilot's chair." 

"And what if something goes wrong? Nothing that superannuated crook is likely to tell 
you is worth risking your life for." 

"That's not true." I told him about the upcoming Assembly vote that would permit the 
sale of fifty T-2 Rampart Mandate planets to the Haluk, as well as the bill that would be 
introduced in the next session opening an additional three hundred worlds to the aliens. 
"Sontag thinks it would be bad strategy to attack the fifty-planet bill by introducing the 
demiclone evidence during the final eight weeks of this Assembly session. I don't agree. 
Maybe Barky Tregarth can help me change Ef's mind." 

Karl was quietly appalled at the political news. "I never dreamed that the pro-Haluk 
faction was pushing ahead so fast! T-2 worlds ... not as desirable as T-l 's, but bad 
enough. Isn't there anything you could do as a Rampart director to stall the sale?" 

"Me?" I let loose a cynical cackle. "Not a prayer. The Rampart board would vote me 


down in a landslide if I tried to block either deal. A huge credit infusion right now is just 
what the doctor ordered to grease the wheels of the Galapharma consolidation. The only 
way to force an open-door treaty on the Haluk and slow their influx is by discrediting 
them in the Assembly." 

"We already have the evidence to do that, using Brown Fleece and the new 
Galapharma material. Dammit, Helly! Galloping off after a long shot like Barky Tregarth 
is reckless and irresponsible. To say nothing of bloody dangerous!" 

"My life's in danger if I stay on Earth," I pointed out. "So I might as well go. At least 
there won't be any Haluk demiclones gunning for my butt around Sagittarius." 

"Jesus Christ," he muttered darkly. "Why not just admit you're hot to trot on a new 
offworld adventure after two years of boring legal shit?" 

"There's that," I admitted, grinning. 

He turned away and stared out the side window of the hopper. Cal Tjader was playing 
his great Latin take on "'Round Midnight." 

"So follow your damned cowboy instincts," Karl said softly. "If you end up dead, the 
rest of us will carry on the crusade somehow." 

"I know," I said quietly. "I'm counting on it." 

"The bad hats will be expecting you at Phlegethon, you know." 

"That's why I'm going there in fancy dress. I'll disguise myself as a Joru trader. A very 
short Joru trader. And I'll have trade goods that no Haluk-oriented smuggler can resist. I 
twisted Tony Becker's arm and he's putting the stuff together for me." I told Karl what 
merchandise I planned to offer and he laughed. "If I give a decent performance, none of 
the local wiseguys will connect my Joru persona with the guy in Toronto who paid big 
money to learn the whereabouts of one Hamilcar Barca Tregarth." 

Karl thought about it. "Hmm. This goofy idea could actually work." 

I flashed a confident grin. "Of course it will. And you know what? Masquerading as 
an alien might even be fun!" 

What an idiot I was. 


Chapter 6 

 

Tony Becker, Rampart Vice President for Biotechnology, was an ultraefficient 
executive and a fine scientist who didn't suffer fools—or cowboys—gladly. He was 
scrupulously upright, loyal, hardworking, and couldn't stand the sight of a certain 
flamboyant black-sheep lawyer who used his family name and fortune to make political 
waves. 

Tony was also the only one I would have trusted to put together my Barky bait. 

When I coerced him into cooperating with me, I made it clear that I needed the crucial 
materials no later than 0400 hours on Wednesday morning, the day I intended to leave 
Earth from Oshawa Starport. Tony grudgingly promised to meet the deadline but said 
he'd probably have to bring the trade goods to the Rampart pilot's lounge at the last 
minute. 

The starport serving the Human Commonwealth capital had such heavy traffic that 
landings and departures were firmed up two days ahead of time. To keep Haluk agents 
off balance, I planned to usurp the liftoff slot of another Rampart ship scheduled to depart 
at 0440. It was a fairly common ploy of impatient VIP executives. The bumped vessel 
would be banished to the end of the line and endure a forty-eight-hour delay. Taking its 
place, Makebate would be entered into the starport computer record only at the last 
minute. 

Promptly at four in the morning I sat alone in Rampart's pilot lounge in the central 
module of the lake-island platform, waiting for Tony. Through the observation window I 
could see the cloudy sky brightening in the east. Every few minutes a massive starship 
lofted silently off one of the thirty-six floating cradles that encircled the tower structure, 
then vanished into the overcast under sublight drive. 

Makebate was on the conveyor already, moving along the underwater tunnel from our 
shoreside maintenance facility to her designated cradle. At 0430 I'd have to be on her 
flight deck, going through the final checklist of procedures for liftoff, or else forfeit my 
slot. 

The wall chronometer showed 0410 hours, and still no Tony Becker. I couldn't believe 
the prickly bastard would screw me, but it wouldn't be any surprise if he shaved the time 
to the bone just to make me squirm. 

Phone him? Nope. I just cursed and waited. 

At 0415 the pork sausage patties, scrambled eggs, and fried tomatoes Karl had given 
me for breakfast did a fandango in my gut. For some reason, the notion of postponing the 
Phlegethon trip for two days was unthinkable. If the Biotech vice president didn't show, 
I'd leave without the trade goods and think up a new way to entice my quarry into range. 
As for Tony Becker... would I really have him fired if he failed me, as I'd threatened? 
Would I dismiss a valued Rampart executive, a tireless charity fund-raiser, a devout 
churchgoer, a staunch family man, merely because he'd refused to be an accomplice in 
my cockamamie scheme? 

You're damned right I would. 

But he strolled into the pilot lounge at 0419, blase as you please. I climbed to my feet 
and said, "Hey, Tony. Almost missed you." 

Becker was a round-faced blond man in his late thirties who wore a white track suit 
that was not only immaculately clean, but pressed. He looked at me as though I were 


something that needed scraping off his pristine athletic shoes, then thrust a padded fabric 
lunch pak into my hands. It was the kind of thing small children took to school, imprinted 
with images of the cartoon character Daffy Duck. 

"Here," he said snippily. "One of my kids contributed the deceptive packaging. Do 
you have any idea how tough it was to get this material put together? You'd better be 
damned sure nobody ever traces this unethical stunt of yours back to me." 

The Daffy pack contained only two items. One was a semiobsolete Macrodur magslate 
with a chipped case and a dirty screen. The other item was an important-looking little 
technical container about the size of a sandwich box that had built-in refrigeration and 
self-destruct units and biohazard symbols stuck on all sides. I tipped it carefully out of the 
pack onto a coffee table. 

"Here's the key." Tony handed me a dime. 

Inside the box were six smaller self-refrigerating biocontainers nested in contour 
padding. I opened one and found a sealed, unlabeled vial nearly full of viscous purplish 
liquid. 

Tony Becker said, "The viral vector is the real thing, with an admixture of harmless 
contaminants and stain in the culture to make it look exotic. It'll pass any test. The slate 
contains a complicated production protocol that I faked up, using data from our own Spur 
factories, and translated into Joru. It'll serve your purposes. However, I should warn y»u 
that a really competent biotechnician will probably suspect that the alien manufacturing 
procedures are bogus. They're too efficient." 

"That's okay," I said, "so long as the vector itself passes muster." 

"I told you it would, didn't I?" Tony snapped. 

I handed him a plastic card. It represented five hundred shares of Rampart Preferred, 
signed over from my personal stakeholding. "A tangible token of my appreciation, as I 
promised. But perhaps your tender conscience won't allow you to accept a bribe." 

I swear that he hissed at me. Then he snatched the card, shoved it into his belt wallet 
and stomped off, leaving me grinning. I took a last look at the small vial before putting it 
away with the others. What looked like runny grape jelly was actually the genetic 
engineering vector PD32:C2. Barky Tregarth would be led to believe the vials were 
samples— from a brand new source of the invaluable virus located on a Joru planet. 

I locked up the container, slung the Daffy pack over my shoulder, and dashed to the 
transporter. I arrived at Makebate's cradle with two whole minutes to spare. 

—— 

The early part of my voyage to Phlegethon was spent in dress rehearsal for my 
upcoming role as a Joru. I strode masterfully about the cramped flight deck practicing 
xeno gestures, dressed in flowing black-and-white brocaded robes reminiscent of those 
worn by medieval Dominican friars, doing my best to convey the impression that I was a 
third of a meter taller and weighed an additional 45 kilos. (A few shrimpy Joru were my 
height, 193 cm.) My stage presence had to reflect the almighty chutzpah of a person who 
believed, as every supremely self-confident male Joru did, that the sun, moon, and stars 
shone out of his cloaca. 

The costume I had purchased at the Mississauga theatrical supply establishment 
recommended by Halimeda Opper was elaborate and expensive, intended for human 
actors impersonating Joru in close-up holo performances. The fabric and accessories 
seemed authentic at close inspection. My body, beneath the voluminous robes, was 


modified by a padded suit that gave it additional bulk in the right places. I also wore soft-
armor longjohns and had additional armor in the hood of the costume. My hands were 
enclosed in six-fingered gloves—the prosthetic extra digits were even capable of 
movement—that simulated hairy orange paws adorned with heavy golden rings. I slipped 
small armor pads into the gloves to guard the backs of my hands. 

Disguising my head and face was trickier, requiring the use of recontouring makeup 
appliances, bulging faux eyes with vertical pupils, skin texturizer, and a bald cap sporting 
a knobby crest and tufts of apricot fur. 

Alien oxygen-concentrating equipment hid the lower part of my face—and made the 
entire impersonation feasible, since Joru had peculiar narrow jaws that were impossible 
to simulate on a normal human skull. The mask wasn't operational, of course. Instead it 
was fitted with a special internal translator device that modified my whispered utterances 
into the alien language and broadcast them through an annunciator at normal volume. 

I also wore an earpiece that would decipher Joru in case any member of that race tried 
to speak to me in the mother tongue. A second pendant-model translator, clipped to my 
collar in the usual fashion, could be activated to retranslate my Joru words back into 
appropriately florid Standard English; I wasn't a good enough actor to reproduce the 
mechanical idiom on my own. 

After getting my moves down pat and polishing my conversational candences, I used 
the ship's computer library to brush up my knowledge of Joru culture. I also created a 
personal legend that was loosely based on a Joru criminal I'd known in the old days. 

My new identity was that of Gulowjadipallu Gulow, a native of the planet Didiwa in 
Sector 7 in the inner Orion Arm. I had three wives, fourteen offspring, and a pet wulip 
back home. I was a professional middleman, an information broker, as were so many 
other members of my urbane and discreet race. I was semiretired, but still kept a paw in 
when a truly unique opportunity presented itself. Because I was rich and my time was so 
valuable, I traveled in a late model star-ship of human manufacture. No one at Phlegethon 
would scan it closely because I'd leave it in orbit, hidden in its impenetrable dissimulator 
field, and dock at the asteroid in my ordinary-looking ship's gig. 

With luck, minions of Ram Mahtani or other unfriendlies would never see through my 
elaborate camouflage; and Barky Tregarth, even forewarned and wary, wouldn't suspect 
my true identity until it was too late. 

—— 

Four days out of Earth, as I was traversing Red Gap, between the Orion Arm and 
Sagittarius, I picked up a distress call on the generalized subspace communication 
channel. At the time, Makebate was outside the normal shipping vectors, streaking 
through faintly glowing drifts of interstellar gases slightly below the galactic plane. There 
wasn't a star within 350 light-years, and no solid matter larger than a mouse turd within 
100. 

The automated beacon-style subspace signal was so faint it almost missed me. But 
Makebate's gonzo receiving equipment managed to pull one of the flashes into 
dimensional focus, enabling us to lock on. I only hesitated for a moment before 
transmitting a beamed response. 

"Vessel in distress," I said, "do you copy on Channel 6113?" 

"... We copy on Channel 6113. Thank you for responding." 

The voice was human with a heavy ethnic accent, indicating that its owner was Earth-


born and probably used his ancestral tongue at home in preference to Standard English. 
Lots of people were like that, defying the language police. 

My instrumentation showed that the com beam was very weak. The starship sending 
the SOS traveled anonymously, as was common in regions frequented by pirates. I, of 
course, was anonymous, too. My rangefinder placed the other ship 154 light-years away 
in the direction of the Sag, well out of scanner range. 

"State the nature of your emergency, vessel in distress," I said. 

"Responding starship, please identify yourself." 

The hell I would. With a focused SS com linkage established, the other ship could now 
calculate my hyperspatial pseudovector with precision. If it was an innocent, I'd do my 
best to help. If it was a trolling buccaneer playing games, attempting to entice me within 
striking distance, I'd teach it a painful lesson. 

I repeated, "Please state the nature of your emergency. My name is Hugo. I'm a human 
trader who prefers to remain incognito at this time." This was a coy admission that I was 
a smuggler. A few of them, like my pal Mimo Bermudez, were not entirely devoid of 
humane impulses. "I will attempt to contact Zone Patrol on your behalf if you wish." 

Abruptly, the vessel in distress deactivated its ID blank-out. The data display on my 
console showed its registration and ICS-approved itinerary. SBC-11942 was a Sheltok 
bulk trans-ack carrier en route from Shamiya in the Sag to the big fuel-plant complex on 
Lethe in Zone 8 of the Orion Arm. 

"Citizen Hugo, this is Ulrich Schmidt, master of the Sheltok Eblis. We are under attack 
by a fleet of sixteen bandits. Our ULD engines are disabled and we are operating under 
minimum subluminal drive—effectively dead in the void. Our AM torpedoes are 
exhausted. We have diverted nearly all remaining power to our defensive shields. Uh ... I 
estimate that we can hold out for two more hours, then we will have to surrender." 

"I understand. What can I do to help?" 

"The initial attack severely damaged our communication system. Our SS com input is 
too weak to reach Sheltok Fleet Security on Lethe or any of our Sagittarian units. We 
have also been unsuccessful in attempts to contact Zone Patrol. Please notify the patrol of 
our situation if you can." 

"I copy that and will comply, Captain Schmidt," I said. Then I added mendaciously: 
"My long-range scanner picked up a ZP heavy cruiser in my slice of hyperspace less than 
half an hour ago. It might be able to reach you in time to drive off the bandits. Do you 
have a racial ID on them?" 

"It's the verftuchte Haluk again! No doubt about it. I hoped to outwit them by 
vectoring below the galactic plane on this trip, but they found us anyhow. Twenty of the 
pig-dogs! I popped four with AM torpedos before they needled my engines." 

"Haluk? Are you sure of that identification, Cap'n?" I tried to keep the excitement out 
of my voice. The Barky Hunt had paid off already. 

"Of course I'm sure, du Scheisskopfl Do you think I'm the first carrier to be ambushed 
by these doppelgurkeri fuckers? They're bleeding Sheltok dry in Zones 3 and 4." 

"Well, that's a rotten shame, but it sure as hell ain't my fault." 

Schmidt was instantly contrite. "I'm sorry I lost my temper, Hugo. Please—if you 
aren't able to contact Zone Patrol within ... a viable time frame, then I request that you tell 
Lethe what happened to us, as soon as you are able to do so." 

"You just hang tough, pardner. I'll do my best to set the patrol onto those fuckin' blue 


scrotes. Good luck! Hugo out." 

"Thank you, Hugo. Sheltok Eblis is out." 

I'd lied to Schmidt just in case his emergency was a hoax. I hadn't scanned a ZP 
starship for over thirty hours, and that one had been back in Zone 8 of the Orion Arm, 
nearly 2,200 light-years away. The patrol has precious few high-ross vessels, and they 
use them to guard heavily traveled regular shipping lanes, not the godforsaken underbelly 
of Red Gap. 

But not to worry, Cap'n! Makebate could substitute nicely for a ZP heavy cruiser. And 
I was bored and ready for some Lone Ranger action. 

—— 

Roaring down the hype at max pseudovee, I arrived at the ambush scene well within 
Schmidt's estimated two-hour limit. Still, it was a near thing. The shields of the great 
eight-kilometer-long carrier were flickering crimson by then, and they wouldn't have held 
up much longer. 

The bandits were so intent on savaging Eblis that it took them forever to spot me 
coming at them from down under, among the dust clouds. When one of them finally 
scanned Makebate, the whole bunch broke off their bombardment, engaged ULD, and 
sheered away in sixteen different directions. They were driving speedy small starships 
that looked something like Bodascon Y600 knockoffs, ornamented with those odd cobalt-
blue running lights the Haluk are fond of. They had plenty of horsepower to fly rings 
around a slow-moving leviathan like Eblis, but were hardly a match for my souped-up 
sled and its extravagant weapon systems. 

I played reasonably fair—aside from misrepresenting myself as Zone Patrol—sending 
warning shots from my actinic cannons at the Haluk ships and calling for them to throw 
in the towel or sincerely regret it. They kept running, most of them too panicked by my 
scary conformation and superior speed even to fire on me. I made a recording of each 
pirate ship's image and fuel signature before wasting it. It took me almost two hours to 
chase down the last of the sixteen, by which time I'd lost my appetite for one-sided 
combat—not that I had any alternative to slaughtering them. If I gave them a pass, they'd 
just find fresh prey. 

There was no way to tell if the doomed Haluk had sent subspace alarms to their base. I 
was already having uneasy second thoughts about the wisdom of my knight-errancy, but I 
put my worries aside, figuring I hadn't really compromised the Phleg operation. If the 
Haluk high command recognized Makebate from a pirate's description—so what? They 
already knew I was prowling the galaxy; the lovely Dolores da Gama had seen to that. 
But they didn't know my destination or my mission, and they certainly had no idea I'd be 
doing a turn in Joru disguise. 

Look on the bright side, Helly! I told myself. You did your good deed for the day. 

And now I had proof of Haluk freebootery in the inner galactic whorl to add to the pile 
of accumulating evidence against them, plus some interesting questions that needed 
answers: 

Were Haluk trans-ack pirates operating out of an independent base in the Sag, or were 
they using Y'tata facilities? Was it possible that the Haluk had formed a secret alliance 
with the frolicksome albino farters? Were the hijackings intended to create an artificial 
shortage of ultraheavy elements, or did the Haluk have other motives for grabbing the 
stuff? 


Perhaps Barky Tregarth would know. 

If he didn't, I might just be forced to nab me a Y pirate out of some low Phlegethon 
dive and hook him to the truth machine. It would be a nasty interrogation for both of us. 
Sometimes aliens didn't survive psychotronic questioning. (Occasionally humans didn't, 
either.) And unless I corked the victim securely, the stress of the procedure would 
generate a stomach-churning stench. Maybe I could grill the Y while wearing a space 
suit... 

I returned to the immediate vicinity of the derelict trans-ack carrier and dropped out of 
hyperspace. The region was still boiling with ionic crud from the earlier bombardment, 
futzing the big ship's scanners, but to be on the safe side I erected Makebate's 
dissimulator before hailing Captain Schmidt on short-range RE I didn't want him or his 
crew to get a close look at me. 

"Sheltok Eblis, this is your old pal Hugo. Do you copy? The bandits are gone and 
won't be back. You can relax now." 

A Germanic expletive came out of my com speaker, and then the viewer showed an 
agitated middle-aged man in the ugly marigold-colored Sheltok uniform. He had brush-
cut hair and a thick neck. 

"You destroyed the Haluk pirates! All sixteen! Who are you? What are you?" 

I had the recorder going again. I ignored the skipper's demand that I turn on my 
flightdeck video. "Captain Schmidt, congratulations on your survival. Do you have any 
casualties?" 

"No, Gott sei Dank! But it was a close call for the engineers when our ULD 
powerplant was disabled. We—We are very grateful for your assistance, Hugo." 

"Are you aware," I said formally, "that Sheltok management has suppressed 
information about Haluk pirate attacks against ultraheavy element carriers? The media 
and the general public know nothing about them." 

The captain's hooded blue eyes looked away. "Ach, it's a political thing, you know? 
Anyone who speaks of it..." He trailed off, shaking his head. 

"How long have Haluk bandits been attacking Sheltok ships?" 

But he was too shrewd to fall into my clumsy trap. "I know what you're trying to do," 
he growled. "You think you'll sell my admission to the web-tabloid muckrakers. Wouldn't 
they pay a pretty penny for a sensational story like this! Well, you won't get any more out 
of me, whoever the hell you are. What good is it to be rescued from killer pirates if one 
ends up Thrown Away for corporate disloyalty, eh? Answer me that!" 

"If criminal behavior by the Haluk is brought into the open, they can be pressured to 
cease and desist. You could avenge the other victims and prevent—" 

He interrupted me with a scornful laugh. "I thought before that you were a fool, Hugo. 
Now I know it for a fact. Sheltok will stamp out these Haluk vermin and their renegade 
Y'tata confederates without having its affairs smeared across the filthy media. 
Meanwhile, the situation must be kept under wraps so as not to undermine public 
confidence in the Concern. Do you understand?" 

"I only want to help." 

He suddenly sounded very tired. "Then call Lethe on your subspace communicator 
and ask them to send a tug for us. Send it soon, Hugo. Eblis out." 

The viewer went dark. And that was that. 

I did as Schmidt asked, in a roundabout fashion. As I resumed my interrupted voyage, 


I contacted Karl Nazarian on the SS com and fed him the recorded information I'd 
gathered on the pirate attack. 

"Sixteen Haluk bandits attacking one bulk carrier?" he marveled. "Good grief. It 
almost sounds as though your war has already started." 

"Pass this fresh intelligence along to Ef Sontag. Then find a way to anonymously relay 
Eblis's request for a tug to Shel-tok Tower. Their external security people will take it 
seriously if they're given the coordinates of the derelict." 

"What about informing Zone Patrol?" 

"Don't bother. The report would only be suppressed. The carrier captain let slip that 
Haluk attacks are common out here. Sheltok's just keeping it quiet so as not to rock the 
consortium applecart ... Do you have any good news for me?" 

"Well, there are no demiclones on Sontag's staff or in his family. Hector and Cassius 
are skulking around the Assembly dining rooms, pinching used water glasses and half-
eaten croissants. So far, no Delegates test positive. Lotte has analyzed and recollated all 
of the Gala secret files. She's working with Sontag's people to mesh the new data with the 
old. Bea Mangan found six scientists willing to do tissue-culture research with the 
mystery gene." 

"That's great." 

"Other news: Simon nominated Gunter Eckert to be the new Rampart chairman and 
John Ellington to be VC. The board will vote when Eve returns from the Spur next week. 
Not a trace of your brother Dan. However, one of the injured guards recovered enough to 
help InSec make up computer-model images of three of Dan's abductors. Let me show 
them to you. I think you'll find them interesting." 

Three male faces, side by side, flashed onto the com display. Two of the men were 
totally nondescript; but there was something disturbingly familiar about the third, and I 
felt a sudden dry sensation in my throat. 

"Karl, is it my imagination, or does the guy in the middle look a little like Alistair 
Drummond? Remove the mustache, add more flesh to the cheeks, and lose the eye bags, 
give him a designer haircut..." 

"The resemblance isn't very close, but I spotted it, too." 

"Drummond and the Haluk!? The aliens washed their hands of him—all but betrayed 
him to us!" 

"Yes," said Karl. "The resemblance is probably coincidental. But I wanted to show it 
to you anyhow. Give you some food for thought." 

"Thanks all to hell," I grumbled. "Anything else?" 

"The weather in Toronto is sensational—twenty-three degrees celsius, bright sunshine, 
balmy spring breezes. The Conurb Council turned off the force-field umbrella for the first 
time this year." 

"Wish I was there." 

"No, you don't," said Karl Nazarian. 

He bid me goodbye and I resumed my interrupted journey to Phlegethon. A day or so 
later I arrived at the asteroid without further incident. 

—— 

From space the little world looked like nothing much— perhaps a pitted and decaying 
pumpkin, dull orange-black in color, with a handful of tiny orbiting craft floating around 
it like fruit flies. Here and there amber lights shone out of craters in the surface. What 


seemed to be scores of deformed silver minnows nibbling the pumpkin rind—together 
with numbers of smaller noshmates—were actually huge transac-tinide carriers and lesser 
starships, either taking on fuel or docked nose-to-ground while their crews rested and 
recreated inside the not so heavenly body. 

I have been told that the original Phlegethon of Greek mythology was a fiery river in 
Hades. Sheltok Concern owned a dozen or so similar way stations with brimstony 
names—Gehenna, Styx, Sheol, Tophet, Avernus, Niflheim, and the like—that served 
vessels bound to or from the terrible R-class worlds where ultraheavy elements are 
mined. Compared to the genuine inferno of the Sagittarian arm of the Milky Way—
nearly lifeless, seething with deadly gamma and x-radiation blasted out from the galactic 
hub, clogged by colossal interstellar dust clouds and minefields of cosmic debris, and 
infested with malignant little black holes and the weird oscillating novae that generate 
stable transactinide elements—dreary Phlegethon was a Garden of Eden. 

My computer told me that the asteroid was only 163 kilometers in diameter. It 
followed a distant orbit about a melancholy blood-orange sun near the outer margin of the 
Whorl. The other planets in its solar system were tired gas giants and waterless desert 
worlds. What made Phlegethon appealing to starfarers was the fact that it was not 
composed of solid rock or sterile meteoric metal, as are most asteroids. Phleg was a 
carbonaceous chondrite. 

CC's are as common as comets in our galaxy. Most of them are smaller than a bread 
box, a mixture of iron and magnesium silicates, other minerals, and generous amounts of 
dihydrogen oxide, plus lots of simple organic compounds—including amino acids, the 
building blocks of life. Little CC's, falling as meteorites, can seed the oceans of newborn 
worlds and cook up primordial soup. Large CC's, judiciously carved and riddled, are the 
best possible interstellar way stations. 

Warm one of these lumps up with an internal powerplant to melt the embedded ice, 
provide light and enough artificial gravity inside so denizens and visitors can walk about 
in reasonable comfort, crack some of the organic compounds to release nitrogen, oxygen, 
and carbon dioxide for a breathable atmosphere in the tunnels, and you have an instant 
space station. Add fertilizing trace elements to the pulverized asteroidal substance and 
you can build yourself a garden in space, for an asteroidal carbonaceous chondrite is 
nothing but a big ball of rocky dirt. Carbon-based foodstuffs will grow like mad in an 
enhanced CC. So will marijuana, magic mushrooms, coca shrubs, dilly beans, 
pseudopoon, rakka, hebenon, and a host of other recreational narcotic plants. Phlegeton 
grew those, but it was also noted for its succulent salad veggies, suzyberries, sweet 
melons, and barley. 

Yep, barley. For beer. The place had five microbreweries. 

Even though Phlegethon was Sheltok property, it operated as a freesoil world. There 
were none of the usual arrival formalities when my gig docked at one of the small-craft 
mooring facilities. I came through the airlock carrying only a locked titanium case 
hanging at my hip on a baldric. It contained the contents of the Daffy pack and a Hogan 
H-18 miniaturized low-power psychotronic interrogation device that would enable me to 
learn whether Barky knew anything at all useful. If he did, I'd take him back to Makebate 
and attach him to really efficient truth machines for more serious discussion. 

I'd be returning regularly to my starship to sleep and get a decent meal. My costume's 
mask had ports for drinking through a straw and the insertion of small edibles, and Joru 


readily consumed many kinds of human alcoholic beverages and snack foods; but I 
wasn't going to give up my favorite rib-stickin' ranch-type vittles for the duration. My 
other personal needs would be take care of in the asteroid's public conveniences, 
omniracial cubicles of the type that are blast-sterilized after every use. 

Hidden under my robes was a collection of special equipment that included both a 
stun-gun and a Kagi blue-ray blaster, restraint cuffs in several sizes, antigravity 
supporters similar to the ones Black Leather and Brown Fleece had used on me during 
my abduction, and a projector capable of generating a movable small force-field 
hemisphere. My flexible body armor would protect me from stun-darts and most types of 
photon pistols, but I really hoped I wouldn't get into a gunfight. The damned six-digit 
paws didn't enhance trigger dexterity. 

The arrival-departure lobby of Phlegethon was a roughhewn cavern, very well lit, 
swarming with people of four races. Humans were the most numerous, but there were 
plenty of Y'tata and Joru. A few groups of ponderous Kalleyni slouched about, giggling 
and gaping at the goofy-looking humanoid entities. 

Gravity in this part of the asteroid was about seven-eighths terrestrial, enough to put a 
good bounce in your step. The air was chilly, humid, and smelled faintly of 
formaldehyde, one of the simple organic compounds abundant in the asteroidal 
substance. A thin mist hung about the light fixtures. I could hear the dull roar of powerful 
ventilation equipment. 

The floor appeared to be wet tarmac, cambered for drainage and punctuated by 
openings covered by ceramalloy grates. The walls and ceiling, so heavily pocked and 
cratered that they resembled gritty dark Swiss cheese, were covered by a transparent 
sealant that had cracked in numerous areas, allowing meltwater and gases to seep 
through. You could see embedded chunks of dirty ice everywhere. A rat's nest of exposed 
cables, pipes, and utility ducts decorated the ceiling. 

At regular intervals around the chamber perimeter were large tunnels topped with 
directional signs. They served as pedestrian thoroughfares, or gave access to elevators 
and the small network of transport capsules. Other openings in the lobby wall, stoppered 
by glass doors with heavy gaskets, led to Sheltok offices, the better human-style hotels, 
and the quarters of legitimate trading establishments. 

I wasn't interested in the latter. 

As I stood in a small alcove studying a holographic map of the place, a young Y'tata 
sidled up to me. His wrinkled albino skin was an unhealthy gray and the beady red eyes 
were crusted with matter. He was dressed in light green pants, a long-sleeve green shirt, 
and a copper-scaled kilt and vest. The garments were typical of a Y starship crew 
member, but they were shabby and tarnished. 

"Hey, Mr. Joru, welcome to Phleg! You maybe need a guide? I'm your main man. 
Whataya say?" He spoke in Standard English, as aliens are obliged to do on human 
worlds—at least when humans are likely to be listening. Y'tata translation devices have a 
snappy command of semi-obsolete English slang. 

"Go away," I said shortly. I figured him for a maroony, one of those unfortunate 
wretches who can be found on almost any galactic way station, dumped off for some 
infraction of ship's discipline and trying to earn enough credit through odd jobs to get 
back to their home world. Human and Y maroonies were the most common, although 
Qastt castaways were coming on strong in the Perseus Spur now that they'd signed a trade 


treaty with the CHW. 

"I'm Sh'muz. Good name for a fast talker, hey? Or doesn't that translate? Ha-ha! I can 
help you find abso-fuckin'-lutely anything you need. How's about a comfy high-oxygen 
hotel with nice hard beds? A restaurant with juwulimopsh like your dear old mothers used 
to cook? Hey, you into sex for hire? Primo dope? Honest Injun gambling?" 

I stared haughtily at the entity in the condescending manner of my kind. Joru and 
Y'tata shared roughly the same region of the inner galaxy, where for over twenty 
thousand terrestrial years they were the only stargoing Insaps. Their relationship had been 
one of contemptuous toleration until the advent of the appalling Commonwealth of 
Human Worlds, with its superior technology and policy of relentless racial 
aggrandizement. A sense of mutual humiliation had drawn the Joru and Y'tata closer 
together. 

But not too close. 

For Y'tata digestive processes generate peculiarly malodorous gases that once served 
as a useful deterrent to predators on their planet of origin. The effluvia are a rank offense 
to the sensibilities of the fastidious Joru, whose breathing equipment concentrates oxygen 
from the ambient atmosphere of exotic worlds and tends to amplify smells as well. On 
Earth and the larger human colonies, there are laws requiring Y'tata visitors to avert the 
danger of backfiring by taking special medication; but minor settlements like Phlegethon 
that make a special effort to attract alien customers tend to be more easygoing. With a 
little extra effort, your average Y-on-the-street can control himself in most interracial 
social situations. 

Sh'muz was doing his best not to offend, but not really succeeding. I was much taller 
and probably scary-looking, making the creature nervous. 

Maybe it was the olfactory assault that overcame my common sense. At any rate, I 
committed what eventually proved to be a major blunder. Stepping back a few paces 
from the worst of the fug, I muttered, "There is only one way in which you might assist 
me, disgusting noisome entity. Do you know where I might find a human trader named 
Barney Cornwall?" 

Sh'muz blinked his red eyes rapidly, a mannerism indicating both disappointment and 
despair. "Never heard of the bugger." He perked up. "But I know a Bernie Cohen! Any 
kinda contraband you wanna buy or sell, Bernie's the guy. I can take you to his burrow in 
the Bazaar right now." 

"Thank you, no." I began to move away. 

"Look—I'll ask around, see if anybody ever heard of this Barney Cornwall. Get right 
back to you. You got a phone code? How about the name of your hotel?" 

"No! Begone, obnoxious person!" 

Sh'muz had no intention of letting go of a live one. "I'll find the guy for you, trust me. 
I got contacts! How's about we meet in about ten hours, see what shakes? There's this bar, 
La Cucaracha Loca, a human joint but all kinda entities welcome. On Level 4, near the 
heavy-craft refueling bays. Midnight. Whataya say?" 

The answer to that one was: Oh, shit. I'd carefully worked out stratagems for 
introducing Barky Tregarth's alias into conversations with Phlegethon locals, in hopes of 
luring him to my bait. None of my tactical scenarios included a clown like Sh'muz 
trumpeting Barney Cornwell's name about the asteroid like some flatulent town crier. 

"Please do not exert yourself on my account," I said firmly. "I am not really interested 


in meeting Trader Cornwall after all. Is that clear? Forget him and forget me!" 

"Aww ..." Utter dejection. The pathetic Y'tata maroony was probably counting on the 
tip for eating money. 

I opened a pouch in my baldric, extracted a human hundred-dollar bill, and handed it 
over. "Please leave me alone. Here is a little something to tide you over until you find 
another client to guide." 

The Y'tata's eyes blazed like the taillights of a BMW as he registered appreciation. 

"Hey—thanks a bunch, Mr. Joru! You're a prince. Or prime minister. Or whatever! I'll 
find Cornwall if I hafta tear this orbiting garbage heap apart. Don't forget! Cucaracha 
Loca. Twenty-five hundred hours. Be there!" 

He dashed away into the crowd, leaving me cursing in a miasma. 

—— 

I got on an elevator and headed down. 

The uppermost levels of Phlegethon were devoted to fuel storage areas, starship repair 
shops, Sheltok offices, and traveler amenities. Below were situated enormous ultrase-cure 
warehouse caverns, many with access tunnels opening to the surface, labeled only with 
anonymous alphanumerics. Some of the merchandise locked inside might have been 
legitimate trade goods; a larger percentage was undocumented contraband. Sheltok's port 
officials didn't care what went into and out of the storerooms; they simply charged 
extortionate rent and collected stiff entrance and exit fees on every transshipment. 

Beneath the storage levels the elevator passed farm galleries lit by dazzling vapor 
lights, alternating with blocks of environmental utilities. In the denser core of the 
asteroid, where embedded ice and volatile organic chemicals were at a minimum, were 
apartment warrens for the permanent inhabitants and the catacombs where shady traders 
congregated. 

The more prosperous of these hucksters conducted business in an area called the 
Bazaar, on Level 32. Here hundreds of chambers had been carved out of the asteroid's 
interior substance. Some were no-frill holes in the wall that bordered on the squalid, wide 
open to passersby, crude excavations fitted out with desks, computers, com equipment, 
and a few stools. Others, with sample merchandise on display, were fully enclosed and as 
elaborately tarted up as the small retail stores in Toronto's Underground Path. Both kinds 
of outfits were swarming with customers. 

A directory, divided into categories, was posted next to the elevator. I consulted it and 
made a list of arms traders. There were over a dozen of them, peddling everything from 
Kalleynian ceremonial tail-sabres to antimatter torpedoes. Since guns and materiel had 
been Barky Tregarth's area of expertise in the Perseus Spur, I hoped he was still in the 
same game here in the Sag. It would certainly fit neatly with his interest in the Haluk. 

I visited each merchant of death in turn, beginning with the humans. Most of them 
brushed me off almost immediately when they discovered the esoteric nature of my trade 
goods. To those who showed an interest, I delivered my spiel, which went something like 
this: 

—— 

MERCHANT OF DEATH: What you want? I'm a busy man, Joru, so make it quick. None of 
your damned time-wasting yackety-yak. 

HELLY AS JORU: I have some extremely valuable merchandise on offer, of a most unusual 
nature. It does not readily fit into any category listed in the Bazaar directory; but since 


the material has a certain strategic value, I wish to sound out your interest. 

MOD: Extremely valuable? ... 

HAJ: [Taking a single small biocontainer out of his baldric case while simultaneously 
allowing his sleeve to fall back, revealing an arm holster containing a Kagi pistol with 
a glowing ready-light] Allow me to open this refrigerated cylinder. Ah—there! The 
contents are a genetic engineering viral vector known as PD32:C2. 

MOD: Never heard of it. And I don't deal in biological warfare items. Get lost. 

HAJ: This viral vector is of special interest to the Haluk race. They pay the human 
corporation Rampart Concern enormous sums for it. 

MOD: [Slight lessening of hostility] Oh. That stuff. 

HAJ: Precisely. In the Perseus Spur a similar small vial of this precious substance would 
bring 250,000 on the black market—twice as much if sold directly to the blue-skinned 
ones. 

MOD: [In disbelief] Haifa million bucks for one of those little ampules? You shittin' me, 
high pockets? 

HAJ: That is still twenty percent less than Rampart retail. But here is an interesting thing: 
this PD32:C2 was not manufactured by Rampart! It comes from an entirely new viral 
source on a certain Joru world. The simpletons there do not realize that the vector they 
are producing for the genetic modification of livestock is identical to the substance so 
desperately coveted by the Haluk. This vial I have shown you is only a sample. I have 
access to unlimited quantities—and my price is a mere 120,000 per vial. 

MOD: [Shaking head] Yon should be peddling this stuff in the Perseus Spur, fella. Around 
these parts ... it could be really hard to move. Nobody's gonna give a guy like you 
anything like the kind of deal you quoted. Maybe not even a tenth the price. 

HAJ: [Seeming not to understand the implied invitation to dicker] One hears rumors. Very 
persistent rumors of a clandestine Haluk presence in this Sagittarian zone, in 
association with individuals of the putrid Y'tata race. And so, rather than travel from 
my home base on Didiwa to the forbiddingly remote Perseus Spur, where Haluk trade 
operations are spied upon by arrogant agents of Rampart Concern and the Human 
Commonweal, and I or my agents might be imperiled, I traversed Red Gap to this 
place of... peculiar reputation, where I had never before done business. Even though 
Phlegethon is a possession of Sheltok Concern—may diseased maslaw defecate upon 
their corporate earnings report!—I understand that it is possible here to engage in 
confidential undertakings without personal hazard. I confess that I hoped to find 
knowledgeable and enterprising persons in this asteroid who might have access to the 
far-ranging Haluk. 

MOD: /Uncomfortably} I've heard the rumors about Haluk pirates going after Sheltok 
carriers in the Sag. Far as I know, they're just rumors. No blueberry bandits ever drop 
in here to fuel up or hit the casinos. 

HAJ: I must speak frankly now. The name of a certain human who has been known to 
trade with the Haluk was suggested to me by a colleague on Didiwa. I confess that I 
originally came to Phlegethon hoping to make contact with this trader—but no human 
I have spoken to thus far seems to know him. Or if they do, they will not reveal his 
whereabouts to a Joru. I would pay an extremely generous finder's fee to the person 
who steered me to him. 

MOD: What's this joker's name? 


HAJ: He is called Barney Cornwall. 

MOD: [Elaborately casual] Mmm. The name's sort of familiar. I seem to remember that 
he's a hard guy to get a hold of. Comes and goes, you know? 

HAJ: You do have his acquaintance, then? 

MOD: I didn't say that. 

HAJ: [Taking a dilapidated magslate out of the baldric case] This device contains the 
complete manufacturing sequence for the Joru vector production facility. Of course, 
the verbal portions are in the Joru language, but that should not prove too much of an 
obstacle. In order to prove the authenticity of my merchandise, I am willing to allow a 
cooperative person to copy this manufacturing data and pass it on to the man 
Cornwall. 

MOD: How about handing over one of those sample vials? For all I know, you could be 
peddling grape jelly. 

HAJ: [Insulted] It is the true PD32:C2, only from a new source! I vow it upon my honor 
as a Joru! The virus will pass any test. If you wish, we can take it to a bioassay 
establishment immediately. I note that there is one listed in the Bazaar's directory. 

MOD: Well... maybe that won't be necessary. 

—— 

At this moment of truth I would tell the arms peddler that he could buy the sample for 
fifty kay and resell it to Cornwall for whatever the traffic would bear. He would laugh 
scornfully and accuse me of playing a confidence game. I would become furiously 
indignant at the insult, grab up my things, and storm out of the place. 

Four dealers called me back before I got out the door, calmed my wounded feelings, 
and eventually persuaded me to let them have a freebie along with a dime copy of the 
magslate contents, citing their excellent reputation among the local entrepreneurs and 
their strong hope of being able to track down Barney Cornwall. I promised to phone the 
next day. 

After making my pitch to the last trader, I returned to Makebate, stripped off my 
disguise, and had a long hot shower. Then I reconstituted some barbecued baby back ribs, 
a baked potato, some Blue Lake green beans, and a handful of snickerdoodle cookies, and 
ate them seated in my command chair while listening to quiet jazz selections by Bill 
Evans and Marian McPartland. 

By and large I was well satisfied with the day's masquerade. Surely one of the four 
traders who had taken a sample would pass it on to Barky Tregarth—or at least contact 
him with news of the sensational find. Then my only challenge would be figuring out a 
safe way to snatch him and do the preliminary interrogation. I hoped the old man 
wouldn't be too frail to withstand the rigors of interrogation. Maybe he'd spill his guts for 
a payoff, as Adam Stanislawski had suggested. Then all I'd have to verify was the general 
truth of his statements. 

I put on another recording—surf breaking on a barrier reef, rustling mint-palms, 
crooning elvis-birds—reclined in the chair and fell asleep. I dreamed of my tropical 
island on Kedge-Lockaby, 23,600 light-years away, and my new yellow submarine, 
which I'd hardly had a chance to break in. 

In the "morning" I ate a big breakfast, since I'd get almost nothing to eat while in 
costume. It took nearly an hour and a half to restore my Joru makeup. Then I climbed 
into the gig and returned to the asteroid. On the way in I phoned the four arms dealers. 


Two of them said they'd had no luck finding Barney Cornwall. They offered to return 
my vector samples. The other two, shiftier than the first pair, told me they were still 
looking. I should call again tomorrow. Or maybe the next day. 

Rats. 

I'd have to try my shtick on the other contraband merchants. There were nearly a 
hundred of them in the Bazaar, trading in everything from scandium fuel catalyst to 
Kalleyni pornography, and lots more were doing business in bars of public corridors. 
Even if I confined myself to humans and Y'tata, those races were far and away the most 
numerous among the dealers. I was in for a long and unpleasant haul. 

Y'tata offensiveness went without saying. And if yesterday's experience held true, the 
human traders would be spectacularly rude. Interspecies harmony wore thin in the 
galactic boondocks, especially between humanity's lower orders and the snotty Joru, who 
had a rep for pennypinching. It wasn't much fun being an alien after all... 

I left the docked gig and reentered the asteroid's big lobby, thinking depressed 
thoughts, for the first time facing the possibility that my clever scheme was a piece of 
shit. Maybe Ram Mahtani had suckered me out of Stanislawski's big bribe after all. 
Maybe Barky Tregarth had been dead for years. Or if he was alive, maybe Ram had 
warned the old geezer to run for his life. Maybe I was a self-deluding asshole off on a 
futile snipe-hunt, and I should have listened to Karl and stayed home on Earth making 
use of the evidence we already had— 

"Hey, Mr. Joru! Missed you last night at Cucaracha Loca." 

I whirled about and found Sh'muz. His garb was cleaner and his complexion had lost 
some of its terminal lividity. A little money, a little hope of cashing in further on a good 
thing, can do that. 

"I told you that I do not require your services," I har-rumphed. 

"Sure you do," he retorted breezily. "I found somebody you might really wanna meet." 

"What! Are you saying you found Barney Cornwall?" 

"An entity who knows him." He paused, then rubbed his digits together in a gesture 
nearly universal among sapient beings. 

"Of course I'll pay you for the information." I named a sum that would buy a ticket to 
any Y'tata planet within Zone 3. "You say 'entity.' Does this mean that your source is not 
a human?" 

"Y'tata starship captain. Independent operator." Sh'muz meant pirate. "He'll want to be 
paid, too. Lots more than me." 

"That part of the transaction need not concern you. When and where may I meet this 
person?" 

He twirled his eyes in the Y gesture equivalent to a wry human shrug. "You coulda 
done it last night if you'd met me in La Cuca. Come tonight. Same time, midnight. I'll do 
the introduction, you pay me, I skedaddle." 

"You are absolutely certain that this person can put me in contact with Barney 
Cornwall?" 

"Hey—is the Pope Catholic?" 

I huffed disdainfully through my mask. "That Standard English slang phrase does not 
translate into Joru, but I presume it is affirmative. Very well. Expect me at the drinking 
establishment at 2500 hours." 

Sh'muz gave a jaunty farewell bounce—fortunately without losing control—and 


skipped away into the throng. I stood there for a while, thinking. It seemed a good idea to 
retrieve the two samples of PD32:C2—after all, they were Rampart property—so I did 
so, giving modest tips to the honest gun merchants. Then I scoped out La Cucaracha Loca 
and its immediate environs, with a view to abduction. 

The bar was close to Phlegethon's busy fueling bays, a handy little oasis for transient 
starfarers and the contraband traders who wheeled and dealed with them. Loud Latin jazz 
played over an uproar of voices. The place served only human beverages and snacks, and 
was packed with human, T'tata, and Joru drinkers. Even a few grotesque Kalleyni 
squatted in a corner where the gravity was turned low, slurping beakers of corrosive 
White Lightning and shrieking mirthfully at their own jokes. 

I ordered a martini. I hate martinis, but that's what Joru drink in human dives; martinis 
with extra olives because that's the best part of the drink. The aliens poke the gin-soaked 
fruit through the eating ports of their masks and chew rapturously. I wasn't ready to suffer 
that much for my art. 

The bartender said, "Something wrong with the olives?" He was a tough-looking 
human with a pencil-thin mustache and sallow skin. 

"They are exquisite," I assured him, "but I am feeling a trifle indisposed. Please direct 
me to the relief facility." 

He looked at me funny, as though this were a question I should know the answer to. 
"In the rear, in the alley. Pay for your drink before you go." 

The dimly lit alley-passage backed on numbers of other grogshops, cheap cabarets, 
and modest eateries in the immediate vicinity. It contained two refuse-recycling units, a 
triplex latrine with an exterior puke-basin, haphazard stacks of empty crates, and a stock-
delivery elevator. The latter was in use. 

Leaning against the toilet cubicle near the basin, I fumbled with my mask and moaned, 
pretending to be unwell, and watched a human worker bring barrels of beer out of the lift 
and tote them into one of the other pubs. When he was gone I summoned the elevator 
myself and surveyed the interior. The control pads were labeled with the names of several 
beverage and food supply outfits located on lower levels. The only Up button wore a little 
sign that said DOCK 0-6. 

Well, well. 

I pressed it and made a short ascent. When the door slid open I found myself in an area 
where medium-sized freighters and the lighters that served larger starships were 
discharging cargo and taking it aboard. Roboporters loaded with container pods were 
zipping all over the place. A human stevedore maneuvered a train of small cars carrying 
crates of familiar terrestrial booze into a kind of cage next to my elevator and began off-
loading them. Unfortunately, he spotted me in the open elevator car. 

"Hey, Joru! Whatcha doing in there?" 

When caught flatfooted in suspicious circumstances, act blotto. "Aargh. I—I fear I am 
confused by strong drink. I am seeking my vessel, the Julog- Will. It appears I have come 
to the wrong dock." 

"Yeah, well, you get the hell back downstairs and find the right fuckin' lift. This is a 
human dock. Joru ships tie up at D-3 and D-4." 

I apologized and returned to where I had started. Back in La Cucaracha Loca, I treated 
myself to a shot of Jack Daniel's. The bartender looked at me askance, since Joru don't 
drink whiskey, but I didn't give a damn. It was celebration time. 


I'd found a way to remove Barky Tregarth unobtrusively from Phlegethon. All I had to 
do was lure him to La Cuca, slip him a mickey, take him into the alley, lose my Joru 
disguise, and get us both up to Dock G-6. Makebate's gig would come for us on autopilot 
if I summoned it with my phone-link. The dock was so busy that I doubted if anyone in 
authority would notice another small orbiter craft nosing in among the lighters and 
picking up two human crew members. 

Yes. It was going to work... provided that Sh'muz and his pirate pal weren't scamming 
me. 

I went back to my starship to get things ready. 

—— 

I arrived half an hour early for the rendezvous, just because it seemed like a good 
thing to do, and sat unobtrusively at the end of the bar nearest the front door. The Latin 
music was less raucous than it had been during my earlier visit. Sh'muz and a formidable-
looking entity who was clearly his informant were sitting together at one of the little 
tables, drinking beer. Y'tata love beer. The maroony had a longneck bottle of Bud, and 
the large ugly Y in the shiny skipper's uniform had just picked up his freshly arrived stein 
of draft and started to drink it down. 

But the brew didn't suit the alien starship captain's taste. He puckered up his pasty face 
in revulsion, slammed the mug down on the table, splashing poor Sh'muz, and roared, 
"Waitress! This overpriced belly-wash is flat!" 

"That's our top-line house microbrew," the overworked human server said over her 
shoulder. "You want more carbonation, blow bubbles in it. Just be sure you sue your 
north end—or I'll have our bouncer cork you so tight you'll never whistle 'Dixie' again." 

This provoked general merriment among the non-Y'tata patrons. A human starship 
crewman called out, "That's telling him, Gigi! Fuckin' Y bum-tootler." 

Actually, members of the intestinally challenged race frequenting La Cucaracha Loca 
that night seemed mostly to be on their good behavior. No alien flatus defiled the 
atmosphere, which smelled of tobacco smoke, grass, hops, popcorn, bacon sandwiches, 
and the odd but not unpleasant aroma of Kalleyni slime. But storm clouds, so to speak, 
were on the horizon. 

"Insolent human shitwit!" yelled the Y'tata skipper to the starman, surging to his feet 
and flipping up the back of his copper-studded vest in challenge. "Step outside and I'll 
toot you right off the friggin' asteroid!" 

A barroom brawl wouldn't serve my purposes. I rapidly pushed my way to the scene of 
the confrontation and placed myself between insulter and insultee. Even though I'm a 
Joru midget, I was considerably larger than either the Y skipper or the human starship 
crewman with the big mouth. 

"If you please, dispenser of beverages!" I thundered to the barkeep, waving a large-
denomination bill. "Serve both of these worthy entities some Pilsner Urquell. Include a 
thirty percent gratuity for yourself and the female server, and let tranquility and good 
fellowship be restored." 

Gigi the waitress brought open bottles of the pricey premium brew with crystal glasses 
upended over the mouths. She handed one to the appreciative human spacer, who said, 
"Wow! I always wanted to try this stuff." 

I appropriated the second Urquell and sat down at the table of the two Y'tata. "Allow 
me to do the honors, Captain," I said suavely, easing the golden liquid into the tilted glass 


and creating a moderate head of creamy foam. "I pray you will enjoy this most excellent 
variety of beer with my heartfelt compliments. It is brewed only in a single city on 
Earth." 

The skipper glared at me suspiciously as he reassumed his seat. It took the Pilsner 
glass from my hand, upended it, and downed the beer in a single heroic chug. "Good 
bubbles. I'll have another one, Joru." 

I signaled Gigi, who nodded and went off. 

"This is Captain B'lit," said Sh'muz. He'd turned a whiter shade of pale during the 
face-off and his voice still quavered slightly. 

"I am Gulow," I said. "I hope to do business with you tonight, Captain." 

"How much is it worth to you?" the skipper inquired insolently. 

I lowered my voice almost to the point of inaudibility. The other bar patrons were 
ignoring us now that the danger of a pong assault had abated. "If you are truly an 
acquaintance of the human trader Barney Cornwall," I said, "and are able to introduce me 
to him promptly, so that I may offer him certain rare merchandise, I will vouchsafe an 
appropriate emolument." I named a sum that made Sh'muz gasp. 

"Double it," sneered BTit, "and you got a deal." 

"The aforesaid generous price is firm," I said stonily. "Vulgar haggling is beneath the 
dignity of the Joru." 

"Cheapskate," muttered BTit. His second Urquell arrived and he took his time pouring 
and sipping it. Finally: "How do you figure to pay?" 

"By means of preloaded blind EFT cards issued by a human financial institution. Once 
activated, the cards are negotiable on any human world and many alien ones, with no 
questions asked." 

"Hmm. This rare merchandise you want to sell to Cornwall ..." The skipper was 
elaborately casual. "You got it in there?" A pink claw pointed at the locked metal case 
hanging on my baldric. 

"Certainly not," I said. "The most valuable thing I have to sell, Captain BTit, is 
information. And it is most securely guarded. As is my own person." I let him see the arm 
holsters up my sleeves. "Do not take me for a fool. Furthermore, I will require proof of 
Barney Cornwall's identity before I pay you." 

"Ask him yourself, you Joru prick," the Y skipper said. 

"He's sitting over there in the corner. He owns the goddamn joint! C'mon—I'll 
introduce you." 

The two Y'tata and I moved through the closely packed patrons. The man in the corner 
had an unusual area of empty space around his table. He sat with his back to the wall, 
nursing a stein of microbrew, and watched our approach with an ironic smile. 

It was a setup. But what kind? I decided I'd have to carry on according to plan. 

The man who might have been Hamilcar Barca Tregarth didn't look at all like the 
doddering centenarian I'd envisioned. In fact, he might have been fifty years old or even 
younger, with shoulder-length brown hair and unlined, rather handsome features. If he 
really was the man I was looking for, he'd been very extensively—and expensively— 
rejuvenated. He wasn't tall but his build was solidly muscular, shown to advantage by a 
tailored jumpsuit of dark blue leather, zipped open to the waist to reveal a trendy fishnet 
T-shirt. Around his neck hung a heavy platinum chain with a large pendant. When we 
were closer, I was able to identify the stone in the pendant as an exotic fossil the size of a 


plum. I'd seen its like before, in the Perseus Spur... 

"Hey, Barney," said the Y skipper. 

"Hey, BTit. Been a long time." 

The Y'tata winked one piggy red eye. "This is the guy." 

I did my Joru thing. "Do I have the pleasure of addressing Barney Cornwall?" 

"Pleasure?" The man in the blue jumpsuit gave a hard laugh. "We'll have to see about 
that." 

"Before we go any further," I said firmly, "I must tell you that a certain associate on 
my home world recommended Trader Cornwall as the person most likely to know the 
true value of... certain extremely specialized goods I am offering for sale. You must 
forgive me if I verify your identity." 

"What!" BTit exclaimed. "You want a DNA profile? It's Barney Cornwall in the flesh, 
you Joru dipstick! Every big-time freebooter in the Sag knows him. Now pay me!" 

"Me, too," Sh'muz whispered. "Please?" 

I took a pair of EFT cards out of my baldric and programmed them with the agreed 
amounts, flapped a wait-a-bit paw at the two Y'tata, and addressed the man at the table. 
"There is a simple way to prove you are Barney Cornwall. Please tell me your other 
nickname." 

His dark eyes turned to slits and I felt a brief touch of uneasiness. But after a 
prolonged pause, he smiled again and said softly, "Some people call me Barky." 

"The very answer I had hoped for! Thank you for enduring my necessary gaucherie in 
a civilized manner." I handed EFT cards to each of the Y'tata. "And now I must insist that 
you two entities depart forthwith." Sh'muz scuttled off, but B'lit continued to stand there, 
smirking insolently. "Go!" I roared. Grabbing the copper epaulets of his uniform vest, I 
spun him about and gave him a propelling knee in the backside. 

Bad move. He laughed, then retaliated as only a Y'tata can, strolling out of the place in 
a fusillade of farts as patrons rushed to get out of his way, groaning and cursing. But an 
instant later some sort of powerful exhaust fan kicked in and quickly sucked up the reek. 
I suppose there was a special sensor for social errors in this sort of place. The bartender 
cried, "Drinks on the house!" and any potential exodus was nipped in the bud. 

Barky Tregarth was unperturbed. He indicated the seat opposite him and said, "Sit 
down." When I did, he stared at me in silence for several minutes, finishing his stein of 
beer. Then he gave a little nod, as though satisfied by his inspection, and placed a small 
object on the table between us. 

It was one of the biocontainers of doctored PD32:C2 I'd handed out to the arms 
dealers the day before. 

"Terrific bait!" he said. "The real thing. I had it checked out. And that's a damned 
good xeno disguise, too." 

My innards turned to ice. I sat without moving. He'd made me as a human and a fraud, 
probably knew I was Ram Mahtani's mystery client. But did he know who I really was? 
And was there still a chance I could pull off the abduction? 

He continued, "I knew you were looking for me as soon as your Y'tata bud contacted 
Captain B'lit yesterday. I had to check you out, after a warning that I got from a friend on 
Earth, so I had one of my people zap your paw with a diagnosticon in the seventh gun 
shop you visited yesterday. A medical body scanner, you know? You never noticed the 
gadget sitting on the counter. It said the skin of your hand wasn't alive. Imagine that! So 


you're not a Joru, and there's no new source of PD32:C2, and I'm kinda pissed off 'cause I 
was really hoping somebody had the fuckin' key to El Dorado for sale." 

"There's still a lot of money to be made," I said, and started to open my baldric pouch. 

"Hold still," Barky hissed. "You wouldn't be dumb enough to reach for a gun, would 
you? An associate of mine at the table behind you has you targeted. And I know about the 
Kagi and the Ivanov stashed up your sleeves." 

But do you also know about my body armor? And my force-field generator? 

"I'm reaching for another EFT card," I explained. "A very friendly sort of weapon. 
May I?" 

He inclined his head and I pulled the little slip of plastic out and passed it across the 
table. It was Adam Stanislawski's last minute contribution to the war chest. Barky 
Tregarth's eyebrows rose as he checked the load readout. "A nice sum. Not El Dorado, 
but... nice. What do you want?" 

"Information only. Confirmed psychotronically." 

He laughed. "I'm just a gunrunner and innkeeper. Moderately prosperous in my old 
age. What do I know worth that kind of money?" 

I leaned forward and pointed to the pendant hanging around his neck. "Where did your 
jewelry come from?" 

He sat stock still, then said, "So that's it." 

"I've seen that kind of fossil before, on the planet Artiuk, a Haluk colony in the Spur. 
Some of the local officials and other dignitaries I met on a visit there wore the pendants 
as badges of honor. But you didn't get yours in a Haluk Spur colony, did you, Barky?" 

"No," he said calmly. 

"It was given to you in the Haluk Cluster, wasn't it? That's why you were so anxious to 
redeem it from Clifton Castle, the fence who lent you the money you needed to escape 
from Tyrins, thirty-five years ago." 

"You seem to know a lot about me." 

"I have no animus against you. I'm not at all interested in your shady business career. 
But I do want to know what you saw when you visited the Haluk Cluster. I want any 
information you have on their population density, the total number of inhabited planets, 
the demographic pressures that drove them to emigrate to the Perseus Spur. I want to 
know how big a supply of transactinide elements they have out there in their cluster, and 
how they mine ultraheavies, given their inferior technology. And I'd like to know what 
they're doing here, in the Sag." 

"Who are you?" Barky Tregarth asked. 

"My name isn't important, but I do have some important friends. One of them is 
responsible for the stake on that EFT card. I believe that the Haluk are still hostile to 
humanity and plan to invade our galaxy. Part of their strategy involves attacks on our 
starships. That's going on right here and now, in the Sagittarius Whorl. Haluk bandits are 
hijacking trans-ack carriers, and Sheltok Concern is doing a big cover-up, pressured by 
other members of the Haluk Consortium who do business with the aliens. The Haluk 
scheme for domination also involves infiltration—a conquest from within. My friends 
and I have proof that Haluk masquerading as human beings have wormed their way into 
the Hundred Concerns. They may even have spies in our government. We need more 
evidence to support our contention that the Haluk represent a serious threat to human 
security. When we get it, we'll put it before the Commonwealth Assembly. Public 


opinion will force the Delegates to reexamine the Haluk nonaggression pact and their 
trade treaty." 

Barky was still holding the nonactive EFT card, doing the old gambler's trick of 
"walking" it from one finger to another. "Politics!" He gave a bleat of derisive laughter. 
"Fuck that. I'm a Throwaway—a noncitizen. The Commonwealth says I don't exist. Why 
should I give a hoot in hell if blueberry raiders heist trans-ack carriers? In the Sag, 
Sheltok charges stargoing aliens and independent human operators twice as much for fuel 
as it charges Concern ships. So the Haluk even the score, with a little help from the 
Y'tata. Big deal." 

"I think they're planning to wage war, Barky. Interrupting our supply of vital fuel 
elements is only part of their strategy" 

"That's a crock of shit. The Haluk want to trade, not fight." 

"Are they buying weapons from you?" 

"Sure! It's no big thing. So do the real Joru, and the Kalleyni, and the Y. I'm the 
biggest gun-peddler on Phleg. And you know where I get my merchandise? From 
Carnelian, and from over a dozen other Concerns who wink at contraband trafficking. 
What do those corporate ass-wipes in Toronto care where the stuff goes, as long as the 
price is right? As for your war idea, I think it's crapola. There aren't enough Haluk 
fighting ships in the Sag to wage war on the Kalleyni fruit fleet—much less the Human 
Commonwealth." 

"Do you know how many Haluk ships are operating here?" 

He held up the EFT card between two fingers. "Will the blueberries know I sold 'em 
out if I talk to you?" 

"No," I lied. "Whatever I learn from you will only be used back on Earth. For political 
purposes, as you said. My friends and I have no interest whatsoever in shutting down 
your Phlegethon operation or halting your trade with the Haluk. Even if we did, how 
could we? The asteroid is Sheltok property. CCID and the Secretariat enforcers have no 
authority here unless Sheltok grants it. That won't happen." 

"I can't compromise my Haluk tie-in." 

"You don't have to. Any questions I ask that you don't want to answer—don't. We can 
still do business." 

"Maybe." He was twiddling the card again, apparently weighing the pros and cons. As 
he'd observed, it was a nice amount of money. 

I said, "If you talk to me, you'll be just another confidential source. CHW can't touch 
you. As you pointed out, you're an important man here on Phlegethon." 

"Damn straight," said Barky Tregarth, grinning. "You try anything cute, you're one 
dead Joru fucker." 

I nodded submissively. "I have a Hogan miniature psychotronic interrogation device in 
my case—useless for prying the truth out of reluctant subjects, but it will indicate 
whether a cooperative person is telling the truth. You can sit right here and tell me about 
your adventure in the Haluk Cluster—that's the thing I'm most interested in—then add 
whatever else you wish to tell me about Haluk activity in the Sag. I can check your 
veracity with a single question: 'Is everything you've said the truth?' If the machine 
confirms your reply, I'll activate the plastic. You'll be richer by four million. What do you 
say?" 

"What the hey! Why not? You know, it's kinda gratifying to finally find somebody 


who believes that I made the Big Trip." 

A waitress came up behind me and asked if we wanted another round of drinks. 

Barky gave her a big smile. "Another stein of Peg-Leg for me, Lola. And my friend 
..." 

"Jack Daniel's," I said. "Straight up." 

"I thought Joru didn't like whiskey," the waitress said. "It is an acquired taste," I 
replied over my shoulder, "and I've just acquired it." 

—— 

It was not so much the great distance to the Haluk Cluster that had deterred 
exploration by the Commonwealth of Human Worlds so much as the uselessness of the 
enterprise. The implacably hostile aliens wanted nothing to do with humanity, and in the 
early days of human galactic exploration the Haluk backed up their antipathy with 
enough firepower to deter CHW survey ships and curious adventurers. 

Later, after Galapharma AC began to exploit the Perseus Spur and faced attacks from 
Haluk colonies there, the big Concern and Zone Patrol got tough. Humans and Haluk 
fought a brief interstellar battle near the human colony of Nogawa-Krupp, and the aliens 
were soundly defeated. Facing the potential annihilation of their eleven colonial planets, 
the Haluk signed an armistice. One of its terms halted their Milky Way expansion; 
another precluded human exploration of the Haluk Cluster. 

Barky Tregarth figured he had a chance of making the trip and coming back alive 
because he was a smuggler, not a representative of a Concern or CHW. The Haluk 
desperately needed the superior technical equipment made by humanity, and the only 
way to get it was through contraband dealers like Barky. Most human outlaw traders 
dealt with the Haluk in deep space; but a handful of the most favored made brief visits to 
Haluk Spur colonies. 

One of the favored ones was Barky. 

Without telling his wagering pals, he prevailed upon a Haluk business acquaintance on 
Artiuk to provide him with a letter of introduction. Then he returned to his base on the 
freesoil planet Yakima-Two, a notorious smuggler hangout, and made his wager. It was a 
very large one. 

He fitted his starship, which was over twice the size of Makebate, with oversized fuel 
cells as I had done, and still had enough room left in the hold for a cargo that he thought 
would ensure him a warm welcome once he arrived. He loaded his ship with high-end 
computers, force-field generators, portable antimatter powerplants, programmable 
virtual-reality ticklesuits, a single Bodascon ULD engine of the latest type, and 1,500 
Japanese silk kimonos in subtle colors, size okii, highly coveted by Haluk males as 
wedding garments. 

Then he set off where no human had gone before. 

Even thirty-five years ago the scanner technology on Barley's ship was hugely 
superior to that of the Haluk. He managed to elude all of their patrols, he found the solar 
system where the cousin of his Artiuk acquaintance resided, and after some very fast 
talking he was allowed to come landside in his gig. 

The cousin, whose name was Ratumiak, was on the personal staff of the planetary 
governor and a person of considerable influence. He advised Barky to forget any notion 
of selling his valuable cargo. Instead, the smuggler presented everything to the governor 
as a gift. On Ratumiak's advice, Barky told the Haluk official the barebones truth: that he 


had made the trip on a bet. 

The governor thought that was hilarious. 

He compared Barky's lunatic exploit to a similar jaunt by a legendary Haluk hero and 
declared that the bold human voyager would be treated as an honored guest. Barky got a 
grand tour of the Haluk world and asked a lot of questions about the alien civilization. 
His roguish sense of humor, snarky jabs at Commonwealth policies, and shocking tales of 
Concern corruption made a great hit with his hosts, who showered him with gifts—some 
of great intrinsic value, including a diamond ear-stud from Ratumiak and the fossil set in 
platinum given to him by the governor. 

Barky had a marvelous time during his eighteen-day stay and didn't mind that most 
Haluk looked on him as an entertaining freak. Amazingly, a few Haluk females found 
him sexually appealing, and taught him several astonishing things he would later find 
useful in his love-life. When it was time to depart, he was bid a cordial farewell and 
warned never to return to the Haluk Cluster under pain of death. 

He set off for the Milky Way and had nearly made it back safely to his base on 
Yakima-Two when he was attacked by a human pirate ship. Its scanners were even better 
than Barky's, and its ship faster and better armed. The bandits forced Barky to surrender, 
boarded, and stole all of the Haluk gifts except the fossil, which Barky managed to detach 
from its chain and conceal in a bodily orifice. Then the pirates stole his ship, too. 

He was set adrift in a lifeboat and eventually rescued by a Rampart freighter, which 
dropped him off on Hadrach, from which he made his way home to Yakima-Two and the 
heartbreaking discovery that he wasn't going to collect on the big bet. 

—— 

"That was really an unfortunate happenstance," I said as he finished his tale. "Losing 
your ship on top of everything." 

"Oh, I got that back a year or so later with a little help from my friends," he said. "I 
knew who'd taken it, you see. But the alien jewelry and stuff were long since disposed 
of." He shrugged. "Then I got busted by the patrol and jugged on Tyrins. I think you 
know the rest of the story." The ironic smile again. "I escaped, knocked around the 
galaxy, ended up here, got lucky. Just imagine my surprise when the Haluk snowed up in 
the Sag. They hadn't forgotten me, either. We do good business. I intend to keep on doing 
good business." The smile turned cold, and once again I felt the frisson of uneasiness. 

The waitress came up behind me again and asked if we'd like another round. 

"A Peg-Leg for me, Lola," Barky said. He seemed relaxed and amiable. "And some of 
my private-stock whiskey for my friend, here. The Wild Turkey Single-Barrel." She left 
us, and he said to me, "You'll really get a kick out of it. Best I ever tasted." 

"I've heard of it, never tried it." 

He held out the EFT card. "You ready to validate this now?" 

"Just a few more questions. Did the Haluk planet you visited seem heavily 
populated?" 

"You better believe it. High-rise buildings packed to the rafters in the cities, affluent 
folks in the suburbs living in little cottages on handkerchief-sized plots. Ratumiak told 
me his planet had a population of nearly twelve thousand million. Other worlds were 
even worse." 

"How many inhabited worlds were there in the cluster?" 

"Around thirty thousand, Ratty said. Ideally, Haluk need T-2 worlds. They'd already 


colonized all of those, plus all of the T-l's and a fewT-3's that weren't too hopeless. But 
they'd really run out of suitable land. That's why they made the big jump to our galaxy, 
even though it was a terrible drain on the economy." 

I had already done the horrifying calculation in my head. Twelve billion times thirty 
thousand equals ... 360 trillion Haluk? It was forty times the population of galactic 
humanity! 

"Uh—do you know how they manage to mine transactinides without sophisticated 
robotics?" 

His expression turned grim. "The lepidos do it. You know, the thick-skinned 
intermediate racial morph. Even in heavy armor, the poor bastards don't live long on R-
class planets. They're convicts. Gracile-phase cons work in the orbiting collection stations 
until they go lep. Then it's down to the mines. A lepido miner turns up its toes, the supers 
retrieve the armor, send somebody else down." "Appalling." 

He shrugged. "Different strokes for different folks. It's gotta be a dandy crime 
deterrent." 

"Do the Haluk have a large supply of ultraheavy elements?" 

"Don't have a clue." 

"Would you say they're highly industrialized?" 

"You bet. Not up to human standards when I was in the cluster, but I understand that's 
changed. Haluk are quick on the uptake. They're good at copying our technology. Even 
make improvements on the original." 

Well, we had proof of that already. One of my friends had compared Haluk ingenuity 
to that of the preindustrial Japanese. 

"Drinks, gents." Lola the waitress set them down. 

I thanked her over my shoulder. "One last question, Barky." Then I'd hook him to the 
little machine and—zotz! I'd modified my earlier plan slightly. Instead of slipping him a 
mickey, I'd modified the interrogation device to deliver a taser bolt. If I acted fast, I could 
have both of us behind a hemispherical force-field shield within seconds. Then out the 
back door and into the elevator... 

"Try the Wild Turkey," he urged. "Let me know what you think." 

I sipped the exquisite bourbon through my mask's integral straw—not the best way to 
savor one of Earth's premium spirits, but the bouquet came through with a vengeance. 
"Superb," I said. "One of the best I've ever tasted." 

"I think so, too. What's your last question?" 

"What are the Haluk doing here in the Sagittarius Whorl?" 

"Grabbing transactinides. They figure if we start experiencing a shortage, they can 
jack up their prices." 

"It seems logical," I said. "Are you ready to undergo the truth test?" I took out the little 
machine and set it on the table right next to the EFT card. Barky had put it down when 
his fresh schooner of beer arrived. 

"I don't think I'd better," he said, pushing the card toward me. "Our deal is off, Citizen 
Frost. But it was fun talking to you." He raised his voice. "Lola!" 

Oh, shit. The force-field projector was in a pocket behind my robe's front scapular 
drape. I tried to reach for it, but my arm suddenly wasn't working. Neither were my leg 
muscles when I tried to jump to my feet. Earlier, when I'd been forced to visualize the 
failure of my grand scheme, Ram Mahtani had played the villain's part. But Ram wasn't 


the one who had worked with Barky Tregarth to play me for a sucker. 

The waitress named Lola came around the table and for the first time I got a good look 
at her. She was drop-dead gorgeous, with glossy black hair that had a white blaze at the 
left temple. 

"Dolores da Gama?" I managed to whisper. "You slipped me a mickey?" 

"It seemed the simplest course," the demiclone said complacently, "with all the body 
armor you're wearing. The drug is a harmless and effective way to bring you down." 

Barky was standing beside her. "My bouncers will take him to your starship gig. It 
was great doing business with you, Lola. You make a pretty good waitress. Sure you 
don't want a job?" 

Dolores da Gama laughed richly and gave him a playful smack on his taut, leather-
covered buns. I felt strong hands grip me, hoist me upright, move me toward the rear 
door. Dolores was utilizing my own abduction scheme. 

"Why ..." I gasped. "Why ... want me alive?" 

"We'll think of something wonderful, sweetie." Her smile was megawatt bright in my 
fading vision. 

"How... find me here?" 

"Your gunfight with our corsairs. One of the pilots transmitted your starship 
conformation and fuel-trace signature to our base on Amenti before you blasted her out of 
the sky. Your ship is unique. We sent out other corsairs to track you to Phlegethon." 

We were in the elevator, going up. I was seeing the world through a shrinking tunnel 
embedded in fog. "But how did ... you get here so quick?" 

"I left Earth the day after you escaped from us. So did other Haluk agents. The 
massive fuel-bunker refit on your ship showed your intent to undertake a long, stealthy 
voyage. It was a toss-up which way you'd go—either the Spur, for a penetration of our 
cluster, or the Whorl. We believed you might have found out about our campaign against 
Sheltok. Other Haluk were waiting for you near Seriphos and Tyrins, in case you topped 
off your tanks at either planet before leaving the galaxy. I drew the Sag assignment and 
went to Amenti with my assistants. And suddenly, there you were. Potting our people in 
cold blood. You're a ruthless man, Asahel Frost." 

"What happen ... real Dolores? You show her ... any bloody compassion?" 

We were out of the elevator, heading for a gig. I had no doubt that a fast Haluk 
starship was waiting in orbit, hidden with a dissimulator field a little less efficient than 
Makebate's. 

My head in its Joru makeup wobbled helplessly. In another minute I'd pass out, and 
she seemed to know it. "You're about to experience what Dolores did. It won't be 
unpleasant. But before you sleep, here's a little extra information to give you pleasant 
dreams. We have another reason for stealing transactinides: our ships will need extra fuel 
for the invasion." 

"I knew that," I said, and faded to black. 


Chapter 7 

 

I expected they would take me to their secret base on Amenti—an asteroid station 
abandoned nearly eighty years ago by Sheltok—or even to a Haluk colony in the Perseus 
Spur. Instead, as I discovered much later, they brought me back to Toronto, to the 
commercial and residential tower where they had established their embassy and secure 
living quarters. 

There I was demicloned. Twice. The complicated process took about seven months. 
When I was finally released from the dystasis tank it was mid-November, although I 
didn't learn the date right away. 

I had the superficial appearance of a Haluk, a side effect of the preliminary phase of 
the demiclone process. The disorienting discovery didn't prevent me from executing the 
Helly Frost replica who shared my recovery room—the demiclone who had lived most of 
his life as a Haluk. But another perfect duplicate of me was already at large, committing 
God knows what sort of crimes in my name. The first impostor was a renegade human 
being, collaborating with the aliens. 

I hadn't had much time to speculate on the identity of Fake Helly I. When the medical 
device monitoring Fake Helly II flat-lined, it triggered an alarm. Rather slow on the 
uptake, four blue-skinned xenos took their own sweet time coming to the recovery room 
to see what had happened. None wore translators. Two of the Haluk were meditechs, the 
same ones who had attended me and Fake Helly II while we recuperated from dystasis. 
The other pair were uniformed embassy guards armed with Ivanov stun-pistols. 

The aliens stood in a close group, about ten feet away from me. They had me backed 
up against the tall windows. I'd opened the drapes earlier to determine my whereabouts, 
and outside was a nightscape of downtown Toronto, a glittering forest of colored glass 
towers. 

The taller guard barked at me in his own language. "Human! Do not move!" 

I understood. With two laser targeting dots shining on my sternum, it was easy. I stood 
still. 

The female medic, Avilik, darted to the bed where the dead demiclone lay and 
checked out the corpse with a diagnosticon. She uttered a horrified expletive, then came 
away from the bed and spoke to me in the Haluk tongue. "Wah! What have you done? Ru 
Balakalak is not only dead, he is blah blah!” 

"Yeah. He sure as hell is," I replied in English. My tongue felt funny and my teeth 
seemed to be too far apart. The larynx was mine, but it was laboring under some exotic 
handicap. My voice was gravelly and deeply resonant, almost Louis Armstrongesque. I 
continued in execrable Halukese. "This one did it! Ru Balakalak will not live again by 
dystasis. This one thinks that is very, very good!" I switched back to English. "And fuck 
you all very much." 

The four of them exclaimed, "Wah!" 

Then Avilik began to jabber rapidly with her male colleague, whose name was 
Miruviak. I only understood one word in ten of the agitated conversation, but the general 
tenor seemed to be that some maximal manure would impact the rotor when the Servant 
of Servants found out about the catastrophe. Damage control was the order of the day. 

I was stark naked. My general bodily contour was still sturdily human, not nearly so 
willowy as that of normal Haluk males. I had a narrow waist and four-fingered hands 


without nails. My skin was sky-blue, except for the parts of me smeared with my own 
blood. My chest, arms, and upper legs were patterned with intricate ridges almost like 
glossy scars, some of them nicely marked with gold. I had seen my face briefly in a 
mirror before the aliens found me. By human standards I was hideous. I had short silvery 
hair. My normally green eyes were now a brilliant sapphire, with huge irises and no 
visible whites. My eye sockets were slightly smaller than those of a true Haluk, but any 
ordinary human observer would take me for a genuine blueberry. 

Hey, all Haluk look alike. 

I held a bloody towel to the streaming wound at the back of my neck. It marked the 
place where I'd hacked out a small shocker device, implanted in the skin at the base of 
my skull for the purpose of controlling me. It hadn't. 

Avilik and Miruviak finished talking and stared at me balefully. The big guard rapped 
out a question to them in unintelligible Halukese. Probably: "Should I stun this fucker's 
ass now?" 

"Don't shoot!" said Avilik. "Don't hurt him!" 

Her male partner asked a question that I only understood part of. "Blah blah him now 
with blah blah Avilik said, "Yes. Be careful and slow. He blah blah but we must blah 
and make a new demiclone." 

Miruviak carried a small case, which he snapped open, revealing a shiny little 
instrument with a pistol grip, a cylindrical metal body, and a short barrel tipped with a 
glass knob. Bea Mangan had used one of those on me, the night she'd picked me up in the 
snowstorm. The thing was a hypodermic injector, the kind without a needle that squirts 
powerful little jets of liquid right through unbroken skin and clothing. It was probably 
full of a gentler sort of knockout juice. 

"Human?" Miruviak said to me gently. "One will not hurt you. Only blah blah sleep." 

He started toward me. In order to inject the drug he had to touch me with the glass 
knob. The guards still had me targeted. They held their Ivanovs two-handed, in the 
approved human combat style. I suppose Haluk demiclones had bought the stun-guns on 
the thriving Toronto black market. No aliens were permitted to carry arms on Earth. 

Miruviak was coming at me from the right. Haluk faces are hard to read because of the 
ridged patterns, but it seemed to me that he was distinctly nervous at the prospect of 
putting down a brute my size. 

The big guard must have thought so, too. "Blah Vumilak and this one blah put our 
guns to his head blah blah. He is too large and strong blah blah blah." 

"Be silent," Avilik told Big Guy. She acted like the boss of the outfit. "The human is 
frightened and blah. He is also feeble from blah blah in dystasis and blah blah. You 
shoot blah blah blah." 

Yeah. Only as a last resort. Okay, let's boogie ... 

I touched my bloody nape, let out a groan, and did a little stagger dance that took me 
back against the windowsill. Cringed away and whimpered in broken Halukese, "No! Do 
not do it. No dystasis!" 

Clutched the sopping scarlet towel tightly at one end. 

Miruviak was closing in, making soothing sounds. I turned toward him and whip-
snapped the towel sharply in his face, then flung the gory thing at the guards. 

Eeeuw! They couldn't help flinching. By the time they'd recovered, I'd grabbed the 
startled medic by both skinny wrists and pulled him against me as a shield. The guards 


fired their stun-guns. Miruviak took two bolts in the back and sagged, dropping the 
injector. 

I picked up his slight form and threw it at the guards. Avilik was screaming unheeded 
orders. The unconscious medic's body hit both Haluk and sent them sprawling. Scooping 
up the injector, I took a headlong dive and skidded across the slick parquet floor toward 
the floundering pile of aliens. Found a uniformed leg. Pressed the injector ball against a 
thigh and shot the high-velocity jet right through the cloth. The smaller guard let out a 
squawk and dropped his Ivanov. I grabbed it. 

Big Guy was on his back, still entangled in the cold-cocked medic, waving his weapon 
and cursing. He fired a dart at the ceiling and another at the wall. A third barely missed 
my head. Then I shot him in the ribs and he subsided. 

Avilik gave a wail and ran for the door. Firing from the floor, I popped her in the 
shoulder. She folded into a crumpled heap. 

Intense! I stayed down for a while, drained of the raging hormones that had let me 
override my tank-induced debility. Avilik had been correct when she opined I was feeble 
from dystasis and scared stiff. I'd also suffered considerable blood loss. But I was a husky 
human male, not a Haluk, and under certain dire circumstances we can do great and 
wondrous deeds. I breathed deeply, psyched myself up, and got to my feet. Washed-up 
Supercop pulls his fraying shit together once again, spurred by the realization that time's 
a-wasting. 

Get out of this goddamn place, Helly. And do it pronto. 

I made my rubber-leggedy way to the door and tried it. It was locked. Somebody had 
to have a key-card. I knelt beside Avilik. If she was the boss ... yes! An encoded red-
striped plastic slip was in an outer pocket of her smock. I turned off all the room lights 
from the switch plate beside the door, unlocked it, and cracked it open the merest 
nanoskosh. Then I did my patented reconnoiter from knee height. Nobody ever expects to 
see a person peeking from down there. 

The recovery room door was one of three opening into a small foyer at the end of a 
long corridor. The other two doors nearby bore Haluk ideographs that I couldn't decipher. 
There were more doors down the hall, all closed, and an alcove midway along that I 
hoped might contain an elevator. No one was in sight. 

I closed the door again and locked it, turned the lights back on. Then I started 
undressing Big Guy. He had a nice Breitling wrist chronometer that I strapped on. His 
spiffy gray uniform with black accents would be a tad snug for my human physique, but 
at least my wrists wouldn't stick out of the tunic arms like a scarecrow's, and the boots 
looked like they'd fit my funny feet. He wore grubby alien underwear, which I eschewed. 

Big Guy's family jewels made a modest bulge in his drawers and seemed more meager 
than my own newly acquired exotic equipment. Maybe that explained Avilik's 
appreciative remarks earlier... 

Before I put the clothes on I took a fast shower. My damned neck gouge was still 
leaking—I found out later that dystasis puts anticoagulants into the blood that take a few 
hours to wear off—so I ripped a pillow cover into narrow strips and bound up the wound 
as well as I could. You try tying a pressure bandage around your neck ... 

All dressed up, wearing Big Guy's holstered Ivanov and with the second stun-gun 
tucked inside my tunic, I looked like one dangerous Haluk. I felt on the verge of keeling 
over, but that was not an option. Searching the other three bodies, I found an assortment 


of colored key-cards and tucked one of each kind into my gun-belt pouch. All of the 
aliens carried phones, and for a few moments I thought I'd hit the jackpot. But when I 
tried to call Karl Nazarian's personal code—one of the few I could remember offhand—I 
reached a Halukese-speaker and hastily hit End. A check of the instrument's dex showed 
that only a list of preprogrammed codes were accessible—and they all had to be Haluk. I 
might have known there'd be no easy access to the general telecom net. 

Rats. Without a pocket phone, and the personalized dex and datalink facilities that 
went with it, you were almost nonexistent on twenty-third-century Earth. 

Well, if I couldn't call for help, I'd have to walk out. Or ride. 

Unfortunately, the aliens weren't carrying human money or credit cards, which might 
have been useful. The only other items I appropriated were the sedative injector—
returned to its case; a flashlight, wrist restraints, and magazine pouch that were clipped to 
Big Guy's belt; an alien switchblade knife I was surprised to find on Miruviak; and a steel 
flask from Small Guy's inside tunic pocket that contained a facsimile of high-proof 
vodka. 

Science tells us that alcohol is not a stimulant. I beg to differ. A quick snort perked me 
up considerably. 

After momentary hesitation I also stole Big Guy's platinum ring inset with a fire-opal 
cabochon, slipping it on my own elongated alien finger. If I didn't have money or credit, 
maybe I could barter. 

Before I left the room I returned to the window and tried to orient myself. The Haluk 
embassy occupied the top 210 floors of a huge structure called Macpherson Tower, on 
Edward Street near Yonge, right across from Sheltok's headquarters. My window looked 
south, toward Sheltok Tower, and by comparing the two buildings I figured I was on the 
180th floor, or thereabouts. Most towers in this vicinity had automobile access ramps to 
the downtown skyways on the fiftieth, 100th, and 200th floors. Maybe I could 
commandeer a car at one of the upper ramp portals. 

That would be my preferred plan of action. If it didn't work I'd try to descend to the 
Path—provided I could pass through the security system that sequestered the Haluk 
section of the tower from the human-occupied suites below. The only other way out I 
could think of was via the hopper sky-port at the tower's summit, which was used 
exclusively by the alien tenants. But high-floor suites inevitably belong to high-ranking 
persons. Security up there and at the skyport was probably extra-tight. The l00th-floor 
auto ramp was my best hope. 

I left the recovery room, found the elevators, drew the Ivanov from my tunic, and 
pressed the Down pad. The wait seemed endless. 

Except for a few signs and door designations in Halukese and a nice piece of alien 
sculpture by the window at the end of the lift alcove, everything I'd seen in the corridor 
looked undistinguished and completely human—the carpeting, the light fixtures, card 
locks on the doors, even the occasional potted terrestrial plant. But it was a human-owned 
building, of course. The Macpherson management would not have allowed major 
xenoforming. 

The elevator arrival chime sounded and I felt my muscles tense. I had tucked my right 
hand into the front of my tunic, Napoleon style, gripping the unholstered Ivanov. If the 
door opened on a squad of armed Haluk coming to reinforce the two I'd chopped—worst-
case scenario—I was ready to fill the car with stun-bolts. But disposing of the snoozers 


would be risky, maybe impossible. 

If I got lucky and the car held unarmed Haluk or demiclones, I'd play it by ear. Act the 
aloof cop and keep my mouth shut if anyone spoke to me. I could only guess which pad 
designated the 100th floor unless the Haluk had left the original numbering intact. 
However, most commercial tower elevators had a hopper or auto icon next to the pads for 
the appropriate floors. 

The door slid open. Only one person was inside, a tall, thin human male. 

My older brother Daniel. 

—— 

For a moment I was sandbagged with shock. But his glazed eyes slid over me, hardly 
seeing me. I was just another alien. 

I stepped into the elevator beside him and glanced briefly at the panel. There were no 
icons designating the skyway portals, and the floors were designated only with alien 
symbols. I touched the pad for the lowest floor. A red light immediately began blinking 
beside a card slot that bore a little Halukese sign. The car door remained open and the 
chime pinged annoyingly. 

Oops. I wasn't ready to try out my card collection just yet. I hastily hit a button a 
couple of floors above the interdicted one. The elevator door slid shut and we descended. 
My brother didn't even notice that I'd goofed. He seemed dazed. 

Dan wasn't going nearly so far as the lower floor I'd randomly chosen. The car 
stopped, and when he got off I was right behind him. He slouched along like a 
sleepwalker. He was dressed in black slacks, an argyle sweater-vest, and a yellow shirt. 
He'd lost a lot of weight and there were dark circles under his eyes. I wondered if he was 
still drugged. 

We were in a residential part of the building. A few other people passed us in the maze 
of corridors, evidently coming from other banks of elevators. They looked human and 
probably weren't. Some carried attache cases and wore expensive outerwear. They 
appeared to be homeward bound executives and I wondered which Concerns they'd 
infiltrated. Domestic robots trundled along, carrying clean towels and other supplies. A 
servitron unit popped out of a little door in the wall, bringing room-service dinner to 
someone. Humanized Haluk have to eat human food. Their exotic edibles are slightly 
poisonous to the human metabolism. I caught a whiff of some savory entree that made 
my empty stomach clench like a fist. 

My brother Dan still didn't realize he was being followed. He slipped a key-card into 
his lock and opened the door to his apartment. I spoke in an imitation of mechanically 
translated Haluk speech. "Daniel Frost! One wishes to speak with you." 

He whirled around, threw me a look compounded of fright and fury, then quick as a 
jackrabbit whipped inside and slammed the door in my face. 

Well, shit. 

I sorted through the access cards. The red one didn't work. Neither did blue, green, or 
gold. I tried an important-looking jobbie with silvery stripes: bingo. 

When I came in and closed the door behind me, Dan was standing there vibrating with 
rage. "Ah, for chrissake! I just finished a six-hour session with the damned tutors. Not 
even a fuckin' potty break! Can't you xeno bastards give me a minute's peace?" 

"One must question you," I repeated. 

"I'm taking a leak before you start," he said. "You don't like it, stun me." He 


disappeared into the bathroom. 

I did a quick prowl of the apartment. There were no obvious surveillance devices, but 
that didn't mean the place wasn't bugged. Most likely the aliens had only installed an-
tisuicide sensors that monitored the occupant's breathing. 

The comfortably furnished living room had an infomedia center and a well-stocked 
library of slates and e-books. Tranquil pictures on the walls, nice gas-log fireplace, even a 
musical keyboard. Dan liked to noodle on the piano and faked jazz tunes rather well. The 
bedroom/office contained a queen-sized bed—made with military precision—and a 
computer desk. I sat down at the unit and tried to call up a general telecom link. No luck, 
but no surprise, either. 

The closet held a fair selection of clothes and shoes, arranged meticulously. Good old 
anal-retentive Dan. There were a couple of track suits that might fit me. I took the 
roomiest one, which was navy-blue, and found athletic shoes and a gym bag to go with it. 
A dresser yielded socks, underwear, and even a baseball cap with a Toronto Blue Jays 
logo. I stuffed everything into the bag. 

Dan came out of the John and did a disbelieving double take. "What the fuck! You're 
stealing my clothes,” I said, "Give me your phone. Now." The instrument was no doubt 
as useless to me as the ones carried by the Haluk; but I couldn't trust Dan not to call on 
the aliens for help. 

He dug in his pocket and handed the phone over. Trained to instant obedience. Good. 
If I kept a close eye on him, he wouldn't be able to raise the alarm. 

I checked the phone dex and found only the same kind of preprogrammed codes the 
Haluk phones had contained. 

When I asked the instrument if it had any extensions, it replied in the negative. 

"You got anything to eat, Dan?" I'd dropped the Haluk diction, having decided how I 
was going to handle him, but he seemed not to notice. 

"In the kitchen," he said sullenly. "But it's all human chow. We can order in if you 
like." 

"No need," I said. 

I herded him ahead of me and made him open the refrigerator. Saw sliced ham, 
Jarlsberg cheese, tomatoes, Grey Poupon mustard. Perfecto! I ordered him to build me 
two sandwiches and nuke them in the microwave. 

"You're joking!" he exclaimed. His eyes were red and swollen and his pupils tiny. He 
was on something, but if he'd been working with Haluk tutors, his intellect was probably 
operational. 

The little dining table was maple, with matching captain's chairs. I sat down, drew the 
Ivanov from inside my tunic, and put it on the table in front of me. "I'll also have some 
strong coffee with sugar. A big glass of water, too." 

He moved about following orders and finally set my repast before me. I told him to sit 
down and wait, then fell on the food and drink like a famished coyote. The last time I'd 
been in dystasis, in K-L's little hospital, they'd fed me baby slop when I came out. Maybe 
solid food in my empty stomach would sicken me. I didn't care. 

Dan watched, frowning and biting his lower lip, which was already raw. I'd almost 
finished eating when his eyes narrowed and he figured it out. He gave a terrified gurgle 
and bounded to his feet, nearly knocking over his chair. 

"You!" he gasped. "Asa... my God, it's you, isn't it!" Sweat had burst out on his 


forehead and his eyes were bulging. He looked like he was about to have a coronary. 

"Sit down." I picked up the stun-pistol and waved it casually. "Yes, it's me. Take it 
easy, Dan. It's all right. We have to talk. They'll be looking for me soon, but I figure I've 
got a little time yet." 

"How did you get away? Jesus! We were supposed to begin the tutoring sessions for 
your second demiclone tomorrow. That's what—" 

"Be quiet. I need answers to some questions. Tell me: Which floor is the skyway 
portal on?" 

He paused for only a moment before answering. "The two hundredth is the only one 
the Haluk use. The one at the hundredth floor is closed for security reasons. It's at the 
boundary between Haluk and human occupancy. But you'll never escape through the two 
hundredth. It's used by Haluk top brass. There are at least three checkpoints, and the 
guards up there carry Kagi blasters." 

"What kind of security do they have at the lowest Haluk level? The hundredth floor?" 

"Double card-locks, gold and blue, guards armed with stunners. It's the main egress. 
Haluk are going in and out twenty-four hours a day." 

Okay. So would I. 

"Dan, I'm busting out of here. D'you want to come with me?" 

"Yes," he said dully. "But I can't. And you probably can't get away, either. They've put 
control implants into us." 

"In the neck. Right. I cut mine out and I can do the same for you." 

He gave a hollow laugh and tapped his breastbone. "There's another one, Asa. In the 
thoracic cavity. You cross a blue checkpoint without your attendant entering the proper 
code, a tiny charge detonates and vaporizes your heart and lungs." 

Rats! ... But had the meditechs gotten around to installing the lethal gizmo in me? 
Didn't I recall one of them saying they'd wait on it? Or was I mistaken? Had they put it in 
before I regained consciousness? 

I said, "I'll get you out of this place. Trust me. If you give me truthful answers to some 
questions, I swear I'll come back and help you. And when you're out, and this Haluk mess 
is resolved, I'll let you live with your family again ... if they want you." 

Another dismal laugh. "I'm fucked, Asa. And so are you." 

"Dan, I'm getting out, and I'm going to raise such a media stink that the Haluk will be 
begging us to rewrite their treaties and let us send inspection teams to their colonies." 

"In your dreams." 

"Who is the first demiclone?" I asked. 

He stared at me stupidly. "I don't—" 

"Fake Asahel Frost, Mark One," I prompted him. "Who's the human male the Haluk 
transformed the first time around? The one out there pretending to be me, right this very 
minute? The aliens didn't trust this mutt, but they had to use him until their own boy 
came out of the tank. I had half a notion the Haluk might have used you to impersonate 
me, but that didn't make sense. So it's somebody else. Who?" 

Dan had gone white. He was shaking his head. "No. They'll kill me, Asa. I can't tell—
" 

I stood up, grabbed his shirt, and hauled him halfway across the table for a nose-to-
nose. "/'// kill you, asshole, with my bare hands! But you won't go quick. You'll scream 
until your goddamn voice-box is in shreds. Tell me his name! Tell me! Tell me!" I shook 


him till his eyes rolled, then pushed him backward. He crashed into his chair. Spilled 
coffee spread over the table and dripped onto the floor. My brother crouched there, numb 
with fear. Then he began to weep. 

First the Bad Cop, then the Good Cop. 

I sat down again. "Danny, Danny. I know what happened. They took you from the 
Kenora fishing lodge and brought you here. Told you that you could go on living if you 
cooperated. They needed background material on me to make their demiclone 
masquerade work. Intensely detailed stuff. So their clone could fool Eve and Delegate 
Sontag as well as my associates." 

"They had me hooked to the machines for nearly three weeks," he whispered, 
scrubbing at his face with the back of one hand. "I thought I was a goner. The pain, Asa! 
Like every nerve in my body was on fire. Like being wrapped in a burning net! They 
squeezed me dry. Then they fixed me up, let me rest and recover. I helped fine-tune the 
act of the first demiclone. They wanted me to do the same for the second one. And you 
would have helped with the coaching, too. Whether you wanted to or not." 

He was shuddering as fresh tears ran down his ravaged face. I leaned forward, 
stretching my blue lips in a non-Haluk smile, and laid an alien hand on his shoulder. 
"Danny, you know what they intend to do. Colonize our galaxy by force. Destroy 
humanity if that's what it takes. How does my clone fit into their scheme? Are they using 
him politically, in the Assembly? Or did they wangle the fake back into Rampart upper 
management?" 

"Bom. You're—he's Rampart's president and syndic. Eve and the others were so 
relieved when you reappeared after being presumed lost in the Sagittarius Whorl that they 
didn't question your strange change of heart. Cousin Zed's still Chief Operating Officer, 
but he's permanently based on Seriphos now. You—I mean, the demiclone—and Eve are 
effectively calling the shots from Toronto, with Gunter Eckert and that Macrodur stooge 
Ellington and the rest of the board sitting back applauding." 

"Eve has no idea she's dealing with a fake?" 

"He's very well prepared. A natural actor with compelling presence." He flashed a 
twisted grin. "A lot like you, kid. It helps that you were always such a headstrong loner, 
not socializing with the rest of the family. And of course he knows the business inside 
out. The Rampart-Galapharma consolidation went through like gangbusters under his 
direction, and he's got the Haluk Consortium following his lead like Mary's little lamb. 
The fifty new Haluk colonies in the Spur are up and running, with settlers flooding in by 
the millions." 

"Did the Assembly approve the three hundred additional colonies?" I asked grimly. 

"Not yet. The vote is expected very soon. Last I heard, maybe two weeks from now. 
Your demiclone has been guiding the strategy of the other Concern lobbyists, showing 
them where to exert pressure and how best to counter Delegate Sontag's opposition. He 
and his Xenoaffairs Oversight Committee threw open their meetings to the media. 
Released a shitload of evidence detrimental to the Haluk and started a slam-bang row. 
The accusations of demiclone spying caused a furor." 

Atta boy, Ef! "That's great. Are citizens pressuring the Assembly to revise the Haluk 
treaties?" 

"Sure. But Concern lobbyists are fighting it hammer and tongs. Bringing in their own 
experts to demonstrate that Son-tag's 'proof of a vast demiclone infiltration is nothing of 


the sort. Only Macrodur and some of the smaller Concerns are DNA-testing their top 
executives. The other big outfits are stalling. No demiclone spies have been uncovered 
yet." Dan gave me a sour look. "It doesn't help Sontag's case that his chief witness has 
recanted his original testimony and now claims that false depositions were entered under 
his name." 

"Chief witness—" 

"You." Dan managed a weak chuckle. 

"Who is he?" I asked in a low, encouraging voice. "Who's the first Fake Helly 
demiclone?" 

He shook his head. His eyes were darting wildly. 

"I've got to know. To stop him." 

"They'll kill me." 

"You'll tell me in the end, Dan. I'll hurt you if I have to. Save yourself pain—" 

He screamed at me: "What do you know about pain? My whole life is pain!" 

Return of Bad Cop. 

I hit him a sharp backhanded blow to the face. "Bullshit! Bull! Fucking! Shit! The 
worst pain you've experienced is hurt pride and failed ambition. You're an arrogant, self-
centered fuckwad, Dan. A driven, calculating monster! You wanted Pop to make you 
head of Rampart. When he didn't, you lost it completely. You hooked up with a madman 
who promised to give you what you wanted. You did everything you could to ensure that 
Alistair Drummond would take control of Rampart. It was your twisted idea to demiclone 
Eve. You dreamed up the scheme to sell Simon and me to that freakazoid pimp in 
Coventry Blue... And you poisoned our mother, Dan, because Alistair Drummond 
threatened to kill you if she didn't turn over her Rampart quarterstake." 

"I didn't," he mumbled, fingering his bashed nose. It was bleeding a little. 

"You did," I said sadly. "And that's your worst pain of all." 

I waited while he cursed and sobbed, denying it. Then I said, "It's Alistair Drummond, 
isn't it? He's alive, and he's wearing my face." 

Dan gave a violent start and stared at me open-mouthed. "No! It's not him!" 

But it was all the confirmation I needed. I'd never been able to believe Drummond was 
dead, and there was the tenuous bit of evidence that he'd been present at Dan's abduction 
from the fishing lodge. When I was in the tank, the Haluk leaders had discussed an 
unstable human rogue with a scheme that fit the Grand Design. The Haluk had suspected 
that the man might be insane. I knew for a fact that Alistair Drummond was a charming, 
plausible, brilliant sociopath. 

And now he was me. 

I climbed to my feet, picked up the Ivanov, went around the table to where my brother 
cringed in his seat. "I can't waste any more time on you. When the Haluk hook you up to 
the truth machines later, be sure you tell 'em I intend to fuck their shit. I'm going to rip 
my skin off Drummond and chop the rest of him into red-flannel hash." 

"Asa, they'll torture me to death with the damned machine!" 

"Maybe. But before you turn up your toes, be sure to tell the Servant of Servants I 
know about his invasion plan. Tell him he better give it up, cut his losses, and start 
begging the Assembly for mercy. If he doesn't, humanity is going to chase his baby-blue 
ass back to the Haluk Cluster and make damned sure that he and his people rot there till 
the Big Crunch." 


"Asa, for the love of God—" 

I shot Dan with two stun-darts. He'd be unconscious for at least half a day. I took off 
my uniform's weapon belt, since I'd never get out of the building wearing it, divested it of 
its useful equipment, and put the stuff in the gym bag with the change of clothes. 

Then I headed back to the elevator. Maybe my vitals would explode when I tried to 
pass the checkpoint at the 100th floor, and maybe they wouldn't. There was only one way 
to find out. 

Going down, I found that the gold-striped key-card did indeed give me a green light to 
the lowest Haluk floor. I was on my way to freedom. 

Aliens joined me in the elevator car at lower stops, but there were no humanoid 
demiclones among them. I decided they must have private elevators. It would hardly be 
prudent for them to be seen entering or leaving those set aside for the building's Haluk 
tenants. 

Some xeno passengers wore native garments, others were dressed like humans, 
perhaps off for a night on the town. No one paid any attention to me. I kept a position 
near the doors in case of an emergency. 

And an emergency happened. 

The door opened to admit another passenger, a Haluk male who wore a dull yellow 
smock and carried a technical magslate. When he saw me his pupils widened in the racial 
equivalent of surprise. He kept staring as we made other stops and the car became 
crowded. Then he was pushed to the rear, out of my sight. 

But I knew him. Mustard Smock! He was the one called Archiator Something, who 
had shown me to the Servant of Servants and the VIP female Haluk when I was still in 
the tank. Then he'd acted like the demiclone project director or some other technical 
bigwig. 

Was he alert enough to spot my anatomical anomalies? 

Yep. 

I felt someone grip my arm and speak in low Halukese. "Guard. Tell me your blah 
blah" Mustard Smock was asking for my ID. 

The door opened again to admit three more passengers to the nearly full car, meditechs 
in pale green human-style hospital garb with diagnostic devices hanging on cords around 
their necks. In his own language I told Mustard, "Sorry. No time." Then I pulled away 
from him and slipped out just as the doors were sliding shut. He tried to squirm after me 
and didn't make it. 

My heart was pounding as I dashed out of the elevator alcove and flattened myself 
against the wall just out of sight, expecting to hear the chime as the door reopened. It 
didn't happen. Perhaps Mustard couldn't get to the control panel in time to stop the car. 
Perhaps he'd decided to brush off his suspicions and get on with his business. 

Perhaps he'd alert security at the checkpoint. 

There were no sculptures or pretty decorations on this floor, and no windows, either. 
The area had subdued lighting and there was a chill in the air. I rejected my first instinct, 
which was to catch the next elevator down to the checkpoint and try to escape before the 
flap and foofaraw started. 

Easy does it, Helly, I told myself. Haluk guards do tend to look alike. I needed to 
change my clothes. Maybe find another elevator bank. 

There was no one in the corridor. I went down a few doors before using my master 


key, slipped into a dark room, and locked myself in. Then I turned on the light and spit 
out an astonished expletive. 

The place was full of golden mummy-cases, standing upright in narrow open-fronted 
booths. They lined the walls and were set up in close rows like library shelves, with space 
to walk between them. A medical monitoring device was attached to each elegant 
coffinlike chrysalis. I knew very well what they contained—Haluk testudomorphs, the 
dormant phase of the allomorphic alien race. 

But Haluk who had undergone allomorph eradication therapy with PD32:C2 didn't 
hibernate. And it was common knowledge that the Haluk did not send allomorphic 
members of their race to Earth. It wasn't cost-efficient for their embassy staff and trade 
attaches to sleep for half a year, and the Haluk were ordinarily very cost-efficient. 

So what were the testudos doing here? 

I went back to the door, doused the light, and did a lowboy scan of the corridor. 
Empty. I opened the door opposite and found more ranks of testudos. Racing to another 
chamber several doors down, I found still more. This time I shut myself in the room and 
rapidly began to change into Dan's athletic gear. 

My mind was spinning and my overloaded stomach felt queasy. There seemed only 
one explanation: treated Haluk were somehow reverting to their original allomorphic 
state. 

Had Emily Konigsberg done it deliberately with her mutant exon? Or was the odd bit 
of DNA some sort of necessary genetic stopgap that actually staved off a reversion 
process that was inevitable? 

When these testudos completed their dormant cycle and hatched into graciles, could 
they be treated again? If so, what did the Haluk think about being obligated to 
humanity—and especially Rampart Concern—indefinitely? 

Rampart... the pieces of the puzzle were coming together. 

I fastened my shoes, put on the baseball cap, and pulled it low over my eyes. Took all 
of the hardware out of the gym bag except the spare Ivanov and sedative injector and 
stowed the stuff in the ample kangaroo pocket below my jacket's half-mast zipper. Put the 
key-cards in my pants pocket. Considered leaving the guard's uniform and boots behind, 
along with the bag, injector, and extra gun, then remembered it was damn near winter 
outside of Macherson Tower. So I stuffed the uniform into the gym bag in case I needed 
it for warmth, and kept the other things, too. I was still wearing the fire-opal ring. 

When I opened the door I discovered I was not alone in the corridor. Fortunately, the 
Haluk lepidodermoid pushing the gurney that held a gold chrysalis was going the other 
way. In their asexual intermediate phase, the aliens are thick-skinned, ponderous, slow-
witted, fit only for simple tasks. The lepido pushing the gurney stopped at a door beyond 
the lift alcove, used a key-card, and rolled its burden inside. 

I dashed for the elevator and caught one going down almost immediately. It was only 
moderately crowded. But when we reached the bottom Haluk floor, the doors failed to 
open and the chime sounded its alarm. I felt my overloaded stomach contract with fear 
and almost disgraced myself. 

One of the passengers said, "Blah blah fexpletive! forgot to blah the gold key?" 

The red light beside the card-slot was blinking. A sensor inside the car had counted us 
and counted the card insertions. One short. 

There were disgusted mutters from the others, who glared at each other trying to spot 


the careless twit causing the delay. 

I mumbled, "Sorry!" forced out a strangled-puppy Haluk laugh, and plugged my card. 
The light went green, the doors opened and we all emerged into a crowded lobby. 

There were eight lines at the outbound checkpoint gates. Everyone held a blue key-
card at the ready and quickly passed through. I fumbled in my pants pocket and sorted 
out my own. When I inserted it, would my heart explode? Would that hurt? How long 
would it take me to die? 

Guards stood beside a second group of elevator banks, those leading down to freedom. 
Were they watching for a bold impostor? If I got through the gate without popping my 
pump, would they seize me and escort me back upstairs to the tank? 

Inhaling and squaring my shoulders, I pushed in the card. 

The gate's indicator light glowed green. 

My heart kept on beating and I went through. Keeping my head low, I shoehorned 
myself into a crowded elevator car. A few moments later the doors opened into the Path. 

—— 

My first need was to get as far away from the vicinity of Macpherson Tower as 
possible. My second was to find a reasonably secluded public phone. Using it would be 
dangerous. Without money, and unable to eyeball my way into the iridoscopic ID system 
with my exotic irises, I would have to recite either my personal code or the Rampart 
general code, plus their authorization tags, to make a credit call. I didn't doubt that the 
Haluk had access to both codes. If they'd penetrated the telecom databank as well, they'd 
not only know where I'd called from, but also whom I'd called. 

It required some serious thinking. If I attempted to contact my relatives, friends, or 
close associates, I might immediately endanger their lives. 

And even if I did reach someone, would the person believe the Halukoid geek with the 
rumbly voice was me? Not bloody likely. All public vidphones transmitted the image of 
the caller unless you physically blocked the video pickup, a move justly regarded as 
suspicious by those answering the phone. People in the upper echelons of society—and 
that included Eve, Simon, Karl, Ef Sontag, and Bea Mangan— screened their electronic 
communications carefully. They probably wouldn't even accept a public phone call from 
someone who refused to show his face. 

But I thought I knew someone who would. 

Almost instinctively, I took the Path westward beneath Dundas Street, in the direction 
of the old Rampart Tower. (I'd only realize later that Rampart would have transferred its 
Toronto headquarters to the ithyphallic monolith on the waterfront that had once housed 
Galapharma.) At University Avenue, I rode the escalator to the upper level and found a 
suitable phone in a com bank at the St. Patrick subway station. 

Using the Rampart code and ID tag, I called CCID Headquarters: Cop Central. I 
covered the vid pickup with my hand. When the duty officer responded, I asked for Chief 
Superintendent Jacob Silver. He wouldn't be working the night shift, but I was pretty sure 
they'd patch me through to his home if I stated a family emergency and gave my name 
and personal code. And the police link would be secure from Haluk snoops. 

"I'm sorry," said the deskman. "Chief Superintendent Silver is deceased. May I route 
your call elsewhere?" 

"No—" 

Stunned, I cut him off. Stood there paralyzed. 


Jake. Jake was dead. Because of me? Because Alistair Drummond had slipped up 
imperceptibly during his public playacting, and only Jake, the wise old cop, had spotted 
it? And not-so-wisely confronted my demiclone? 

Jake. 

Rats... 

I don't know how long I stood there. My precariously stoked vitality was swiftly 
draining away. Several trains entered the station, discharged and took on passengers, 
glided off quietly, defying gravity. The crowds were moderate. A clock said it was 2002 
hours. 

I knew I had to get away from the public phones, so I moved to the nearest newsstand 
and pretended to watch the big-screen PNN posting of News on the Hour. Top Story: a 
tsunami on Hokusai causes heavy damage to a big Homerun Concern manufacturing 
facility. Oh, yeah—and five thousand people died. 

I felt lightheaded and stupid. My belly was beginning to cramp. I could feel a hot 
throbbing beneath the improvised bandage at the back of my neck. Maybe the wound was 
infected with alien germs. 

One thing was certain: my weakened body had been flogged enough. It now 
demanded to be horizontal. If I didn't go down soon of my own free will, I was going to 
collapse. 

Where the hell could a Haluk in a track suit catch some z's? 

I couldn't rest on one of the inviting Path benches. The searchers would find me. I had 
no money to patronize a spa or theater. 

The subway station sign caught my eye. ST. PATRICK STATION. A church? ... Many of 
them were open in the evening. Humans dozed in them all the time, but a sleeping alien 
would alert a suspicious sexton. A public database? ... Lots of people rested their eyes in 
the library, but the nearest one was over a mile away, on Yonge Street. There was another 
in the university campus, closer but still at least twelve blocks away. I'd never— 

Oh, shit. They were here! The first Haluk hunters. 

I spotted them from the corner of my eye—I now had great peripheral vision—exiting 
from a northbound train. Two uniformed blue alien males and a female in casual attire. 
They found a vantage point near the escalator and stood slightly apart, carefully scanning 
the throng. One spoke into a handheld com device, no doubt reporting that I was no 
longer near the public phones. I pulled my cap even lower and hunched my shoulders, 
trying to look less conspicuous. 

Right, Helly, you moron. Why not just hunker down on the floor and put your fat blue 
head between your knees and kiss your ass goodbye? 

I straightened up and readjusted the hat. Tried to look confident and ordinary. Began 
to drift toward the subway turnstile, figuring to hop over it when the next train was about 
to pull away, slip aboard through the closing door and take my chances. Wondered if I 
had enough energy left to make the leap. 

Stopped wondering when the female Haluk searcher spotted me and pointed me out to 
her companions. 

The trio walked purposefully in my direction. 

I panicked. 

There was only one way open to me where they didn't dare follow. I dropped my gym 
bag, flung myself bodily over the turnstile barrier, and landed with a bone-jarring crash. 


A few people yipped and shouted. The three Haluk broke into a canter. I rolled to the 
platform edge and went over. This time the impact with the ceramalloy antigravity 
reflector grid did more than shake me up. Something in my left shoulder snapped and a 
white bolt of agony lanced through my brain. Broken collarbone. I'd suffered one before 
on Kedge-Lockaby when I fell off my sub's flybridge, drunk as a skunk. 

Don't pass out! One last push, Helly. Come on, you gutsy blue fucker. Get up up up! 

I struggled back onto my feet and scrambled into the subway tunnel. It was straight as 
a die, dimly lit with small yellow bulbs mounted along the ceiling every dozen meters or 
so. No sign of an approaching train. 

Unzipping my jacket halfway, I thrust my injured left arm into it in an improvised 
sling. Better. I jogged clumsily along the grid side, where there was very little clearance 
between the reflector area and the wall. An uproar of voices echoed behind me. I dared a 
look over my shoulder. The three Haluk weren't following. 

Pain pain pain. My shoulder. My laboring lungs. My heart thudding like a punching 
bag going full tilt: whop-a whop-a whop-a. Another goddamned chase scene, starring me. 
Monotonous. 

My head ached like a sonuvabitch and I was starting to see double. My brain was 
losing contact with my legs and I tripped'over a structural member and nearly took a 
header. Caught at the wall with my good hand and kept going. 

There had to be an emergency escape hatch along here somewhere. I'd seen them 
myself, looking through the windows of speeding trains, inconspicuous niches with doors 
in them. 

A soft breeze had begun to blow in my face and I heard a peculiar rushing sound, not 
very loud. Far, far away I could see twin starry pinpricks: train headlights. Shit. Not that 
ancient cliche! I tried to move along faster and failed. Picked up my heavy feet and laid 
them down. Felt giddy, sick, hopeless. 

The dancing headlights were brighter, closing in. Soon the sensors in the lead car 
would take note of an unauthorized object on the grid ahead. They would bring the train 
to a halt, leaving me jacklighted in front of it like a trapped deer, waiting for the arrival of 
the Transit Authority Police. 

I was staggering with pain and vertigo, ready to pack it in, when I finally came to the 
niche. Almost passed it by, not recognizing my salvation. Managed to pull open the 
narrow metal hatch, fell through onto my broken shoulder, screaming, and kicked the 
hatch shut. 

A surreal interlude followed. The place inside was spinning, or I was, engulfing me in 
a cataract of deafening sound and colored kaleidoscopic shapes. After what seemed like a 
long time—but was probably only minutes—the chaotic noise diminished into a nearly 
subsonic drone and the psychedelic light show coalesced into solid retinal images, blurry 
but bona fide. 

I sat up, hurting like hell, no longer suffering from incapacitating dizziness. My refuge 
was a lighted utility room less than ten feet square and about as high. The deep humming 
sound, which I presumed came from hidden antigravity generators, had just enough 
volume to set my teeth on edge. 

The walls of the place were crowded with pipes, conduits, and impressive junction 
boxes with high-voltage warnings on them. Through bleary eyes I saw a prehistoric 
nonvideo telephone on the wall beside the exit to the tunnel, along with a cabinet labeled 


EMERGENCY EQUIPMENT. An iron ladder was mounted on the opposite wall. It went up to 
a dark shaft in the ceiling and down through an equally dark hole in the floor. 

I opened the cabinet and saw a large canister of foam spark-suppressant, a pair of 
heavy insulated gloves, two ceram pry bars of differing lengths, a cutting torch, several 
oddly shaped wrenches, and a small first-aid kit. I took that, tucking it into my ever-
handy kangaroo pocket, and turned my attention to the ladder. 

I decided to go down, no contest. I lacked the strength to climb. 

Slip, trip, get a grip. Here's Supercop, descending into a spooky abyss with one useless 
arm, wincing in agony every time he jolts his busted bone, pursued by Haluk fiends! 

I found that I was grinning—even energized, in some weird way. 

Go figure. 

I must have slithered twenty meters down the narrow shaft before I came to a less 
constricted space, and then a solid floor. I pulled out the guard's flashlight and turned it 
on, discovering that I was in another small chamber almost identical to the utility room 
above. It had a similar equipment cabinet but fewer conduits and pipes lining the walls. 
The light had burned out and the place had a disused look to it. The exit door featured a 
substantial latch, a key-card slot, and a sign that said: 

—— 

NO UNAUTHORIZED EXIT 

IF DOOR IS OPENED WITHOUT KEY, ALARM WILL SOUND 

—— 

I figured it had to open out into the University Avenue segment of the Path—useless 
as an escape route, even if I had been willing to risk setting off the alarm. The hunt was 
on, and soon there'd be Haluk strolling everywhere in the underground concourses. I 
knew what they'd tell the cops: "Officer, have you seen our poor deranged kinsman who 
wandered away from his sickroom? No, he's not dangerous at all. Only extremely ill, 
suffering from delusions. We appreciate your assistance in our urgent search." 

Thus far I'd heard no signs of pursuit from above. It would come, though. 

Andale! Going down, one more time ... 

The ladder didn't end at this level. Its uprights passed through two slots in a solid 
semicircular manhole cover set into the floor against the back wall. The cover looked old. 
There was a central inset ring to lift the thing, and I gave it a puny tug. The cover didn't 
budge. I didn't have the moxie to move the heavy thing. 

Emergency equipment cabinet. The longer of the two pry bars, used as a lever. Squat. 
Heave very slowly, using my good right arm and my flabby leg muscles. With a rusty 
screech the manhole cover tilted up a few precious centimeters and promptly fell back 
into place. It probably weighed about twenty-five kilos. 

Okay. Rest, then repeat the maneuver. This time, when the lid lifted, I kicked the tip of 
the smaller pry bar into the aperture. Then I collapsed. A smell compounded of mold and 
dampness wafted up through the crack. 

In a few minutes, when I'd recovered a bit, I used both pry bars to move the metal 
cover aside. It had another inset ring underneath. A long piece of rope was knotted 
through it. 

I felt a prickling along my spine. The rope was new. 

Below, it was absolute blackness and a continuation of the ladder. I switched on the 
flashlight. The lower shaft was twice as wide as the one I'd previously negotiated and 


gleamed with moisture. Some sort of revolting crud was growing around the ladder 
brackets. The powerful little beam reflected from water that might have been another 
dozen meters below. The ladder continued into it. 

Above the level of the water were two sizable circular openings. One was beside the 
ladder on the west wall of the shaft, and the other was directly opposite. 

I didn't hesitate. I replaced the short pry bar in the cabinet and closed it. Then I 
positioned myself on the ladder a few rungs down and painfully maneuvered the cover 
back into position, alternately levering with the long bar and pulling on the rope. Finally, 
I twisted the rope around the bar and used my body weight to help seat the cover, 
millimeter by millimeter. It was very dark. I'd been afraid to prop the flashlight on one of 
the ladder treads for fear my exertions would dislodge it, and it was too thick to hold in 
my mouth; so it had stayed safely in my kangaroo pouch. 

Finally, the lid dropped. So did I, nearly, as my foot slipped. But I clung to the rope 
and bar with my single hand, swung back to the ladder and wrapped my ankle around one 
of the uprights, sobbing with relief and renewed pain. 

When I recovered a little, I jammed the bar through the manhole cover's ring so its 
ends extended evenly on either side of the semicircular opening and bound it in place 
with the rope. Now it was impossible for anyone to lift the cover from above. Then I 
crept slowly downward, dazed and exultant. The lit flashlight poking out of my pocket 
gave adequate illumination. A half meter or so above the water level, I stepped into the 
round opening beside the ladder. It was a huge pipe, completely dry, made of old-
fashioned cast concrete. Perhaps one of the old storm drains. 

A short distance in from the shaft lay an empty Marlboro cigarette pack, a Starbucks 
coffee cup, and the bag from a McDonald's Happy Meal. They weren't dusty and old. 
They might have been dropped there yesterday. 

Oh, Christ... 

No. I wasn't ready to think about the implication of my new find. Not until I rested and 
did something about the pain. 

I sat down and opened the first-aid kit. It had bandages, antibiotic ointment, and—best 
of all—some powerful analgesic self-dosers. I positioned one of the tiny pillow-shaped 
things on my left carotid artery—where I hoped it was, anyhow—and jabbed sharply with 
my thumb. The drug injected explosively. In a few seconds the pain from my broken 
collarbone vanished. So did my other miseries. 

I swabbed the gouge at the back of my neck with antiseptic, applied antibiotic goo, 
and rebandaged it as well as I could using one hand. Then I improvised a more efficient 
sling. To celebrate my repair, I had a belt of alien vodka from the steel flask. Then I 
started to walk. Correction: shuffle. 

I followed the storm drain for less than half a kilometer before finding a handmade 
ladder placed against a dry spillway. At the slope's top was a flimsy grate with light 
faintly shining through. Using my last bit of strength, I crept up the ladder, unhooked the 
grate, and emerged at last into the Dark Path. 

I saw a ghostly subterranean concourse, eerily reminiscent of the familiar Path I knew 
so well, except it was in a state of abject ruin. The light came from portable camping 
glolamps someone had set out every ten meters or so along one cracked wall. My hole 
opened beneath a derelict escalator that had once led up into a long-vanished office 
building. Now it dead-ended in a ceiling slab of rough plascrete, swagged with dusty 


spiderwebs. A titanic structural pier made of modern material punched through the slab. 
Around its base heaps of rubble cut off the corridor on the far side of the broken stairs. 
On the other side stretched a line of decayed shops, some with familiar names. Their 
windows were gone and their interiors had been looted long decades earlier. Oddly, the 
corridor floor in front of them was fairly clean and dry. A couple of overhead ducts 
purred, drawing out stale air. 

At first my fuddled brain didn't comprehend that the Dark Path was inhabited. Low 
walls of unmortared concrete block formed about a dozen open-fronted cubicles along the 
blank wall opposite the old shops. Each space held a few pieces of furniture and stacked 
small container pods. A dim night-light sat on one cinder-block wall. 

I drew my Ivanov and shambled out of my hiding place beneath the escalator like a 
zombie. Saw a community kitchen in front of a ruined Taco Bell fast-food joint, a 
"reading room" alcove with shelves of slates and e-books, a billiard table and a collection 
of video game machines, laundry pegged to a line outside an old public rest room. Heard 
snoring... 

Then a woman's quiet voice said, "You won't need the pistol, honey." She was sitting 
up in her simple bed inside the cubicle with the night-light, watching me, not yet 
recognizing what kind of a creature had invaded her secret world. 

Tottering, I let my gun hand fall and must have groaned, because she said, "I'm Mama 
Fanchon. It's all right, sweetie-babe. Have you just arrived?" 

Instinctively, I knew what she meant. "The—The police are after me. And the Haluk. 
I'm walking wounded, my collarbone and my neck. I can't—can't—" 

I stood there swaying, seeing colored flashes again and hearing the cataract work up to 
a roar. 

—— 

Mama Fanchon was putting on a robe and slippers. A moment later she turned up her 
glolamp and gave a sharp cry of dismay, seeing me clearly. "Santa! Mohammed! Leah! 
Sweet Lord, it's an alien!" 

Muffled curses and squeals from the cubicles. A big old white-bearded guy whom I 
later learned to call Santa Claus demonstrated how he'd got his name by bounding out of 
his space and covering me with a Claus-Gewitter photon blaster. "Hoist 'em high or die, 
blueberry!" 

Two adolescents advanced on me, armed with pry bars. The female shrilled, "You 
heard the man! Hands up, xeno!" 

"I'm not!" I cried, consumed by despair. "Not an alien. They did this to me. I'm 
human. Human, for God's sake!" 

"Bite me!" jeered the male adolescent. 

"Does anyone have a phone?" I asked politely. 

Then I crashed. 

Mama Fanchon believed me. 

She knew anatomy, being the tribal healer, and my thick neck alone was enough to 
show her that I was no true Haluk. She also regularly watched newscasts on her tiny 
portable TV and was aware of the accusations of illegal demiclonery being lodged 
against the Haluk by certain Delegates of the Commonwealth Assembly. 

Others of the Grange Place Tribe were less willing to accept her kindly assessment; 
but Mama overruled their objections, put me to bed in her "hospital," and tended me 


during the three days of my recovery. 

For part of that time I was delirious. I'm certain that I told her my name, also fairly 
sure that she recognized it and drew certain conclusions. 

At one point, when I was only partially lucid, I pleaded again for a telephone. "Please, 
Mama! Have to call my sister Eve, CEO of Rampart Concern. To warn her! He's not me. 
The syndic. She has to fire him. Denounce him. Tell the Assembly he lied. The impostor. 
Get me a phone! Call Eve, get her down here. Convince her. A phone. Oh, God, Mama, 
please get me a phone—" 

"No, honey-lamb. You're not calling anyone, the condition you're in. If that big-shot 
woman is really your sister, she won't talk to a poor sick Haluk. Or a well one, either. 
You better think of somebody else to call later on, when you feel better. Sleep now and 
think on it, Helly." I slipped back into unconsciousness. 

Later, when I was back on the road to rationality, she told me her own story. Nine 
years earlier, Fanchon had been a hospital nurse. She accidentally gave the wrong 
medication to the son of a Bodascon Concern executive, and the child nearly died. 
Thrown Away, her every asset confiscated to settle the massive civil judgment against 
her, she had no relatives or friends willing to support her or pay for a ticket to a remote 
planet where she might have made a new life. 

So she descended into the Dark and began another sort of career as a member of the 
Grange Place Tribe. There were twelve of them—eight disenfranchised adults, three 
runaway children who had fled abusive families, and one man wanted for the murder of 
his unfaithful wife. They lived together, defending themselves against human predators 
and the violent insane who stalked parts of the underworld. Their food and supplies were 
gleaned by "shopping"—the tribal euphemism for scavenging and clandestine 
requisition—in the Bright Path, which they visited during quiet hours. They'd left the 
rope on the manhole cover that I'd found. They'd also disconnected the door alarm and 
broken the light in the utility room, which was only one of many exits into the other 
world. 

Fanchon's nursing skills came to be valued by other Dark Path dwellers because she 
was willing to help others without asking for payment. Many patients gave her gifts 
anyway. She always shared them with her tribe. 

—— 

When I woke up at last with a mind that was fully clear, Mama Fanchon was the first 
person I saw, a woman in a red turtleneck sweater and padded goosedown vest, sitting in 
a folding chair just outside the hospital cubicle, smoking a briar pipe, knitting, and 
watching a soundless Maple Leafs hockey game on her small television. 

Behind her, in the communal kitchen, Santa Claus was grilling some sort of spicy 
meat and toasting buns. The aroma was inviting. He was dressed in a wool shirt and dirty 
Carhartt insulated overalls, with a striped canvas apron tied over them. Next to the two-
burner Gaz stove stood a table spread with clean newsprint. It was set with mismatched 
plates and cups and also held a restaurant-sized jar of kosher pickles, a bunch of spotty 
bananas, and a box of Krispy Kreme doughnuts. 

"How are you feeling, Helly?" Mama Fanchon inquired. She put her knitting away and 
came to stand over me, hands on her ample hips. "Is the bone-brace treatment working? 
The medicine was a bit past its expiration date, but no one's been shopping in a clinic for 
nearly a month. Not since Johnny Guitar fell into the cistern under Spadina Chinatown 


and broke both legs." 

"I feel much better, Mama Fanchon," I said. Unzipping the sleeping bag, I sat up. I 
was naked as a jaybird. Same color, too. "Need to use the facilities. I can walk. May I 
have my clothes?" 

"I think someone had better go along with you, in case you need help." She called out: 
"Mohammed!" 

A skinny teenage boy with sunken eyes and four missing front teeth came into the 
cubicle. Like the others, he wore winter clothing. The Dark Path was cold. My Ivanov 
stun-pistol was stuck in his belt. 

The kid glowered at me. "So the Haluk's awake. About time." I recalled that he'd 
helped with my care while I was flat on my back, passing in and out of consciousness. He 
was a lot stronger than he looked. Young Mohammed adored Mama Fanchon and didn't 
trust me one micron's worth. 

She was rummaging in one of the storage pods and said to the boy, "Supper will be 
ready soon, angel. Please get Helly a nice warm jacket from the hope chest, and take him 
to the rest room after I check him out. Eeyore finally found a new power cell for my 
diagnosticon. Isn't that wonderful?" 

She waved the device expertly around my bod while Mohammed went off. "Very, 
very good! Your collarbone is just fine now. It'll be tender for a week or so, but it's 
stronger than ever. Put your clothes on, honey-bunch. You can eat at the table with us 
tonight." She left the cubicle. 

"Polish sausages almost ready!" Santa Claus called out. My mouth began to water. 
Three or four other members of the tribe drifted toward the kitchen. 

Mohammed stood by while I pulled on my track suit and stuffed my feet into sneakers 
without bothering with socks. He handed me an Eddie Bauer car-coat with the price code 
still attached. The "hope chest" had nice merchandise. 

Trailed by the armed boy, I trudged off to what had once been a public lavatory. Now 
most of the white tiles were cracked and stained black with mildew, and the mirrors were 
so cloudy that they were almost opaque; but someone had reconnected the water with 
jury-rigged plastic piping, and the old-timey tank toilets and sinks worked. 

Mohammed scowled as I relieved myself. "You can't be human. Not with those" 

I shrugged. "I told you, it's what happens when Haluk genetic engineers build a 
demiclone from your DNA. First they inoculate you with some Haluk genes. You end up 
looking like an alien on the outside." 

"I'd kill myself!" the boy declared. 

"When I get my life sorted out, I'll go back into the vat and get fixed. Look just like 
my old self again." I finished my business, had a fast wash, and slipped off the coat. 
"How's the wound on my neck looking?" 

"Got a dry scab. The scab's purple. You're healthy, man ... I mean, Mr. Haluk! Time 
for you to hit the road." He touched the pistol and his face was like polished golden 
marble. 

"You're not hanging out here anymore. No matter what Mama Fanchon says." 

"No," I agreed. "I'm very grateful for your help, Mohammed. And for Mama's, and all 
the rest of the tribe's. But I won't try to stay with you. There's something I have to do, a 
place I have to go. I'll need help to find it, though, traveling the Dark Path." 

"Where?" he asked suspiciously. 


I gave him an address in ultrafashionable Cabbagetown, just east of the city's central 
core, where once upon a time poor Irish immigrants grew their favorite veggies right in 
their front gardens. 

"It's a long way," he said, looking dubious. "Can't get there direct. The DP's broken at 
Yonge. You'd have to detour south to the Inner Harbor, come back north through the 
Parliament Street drains." 

"Will you take me?" 

He laughed. 

"I'll make it worth your while. When I'm a man again." 

"Horseshit," Mohammed scoffed. 

"My name is Asahel Frost. Once I was a convicted criminal and a Throwaway, just 
like Mama and the others. Then I became the Chief Legal Officer of Rampart Concern. I 
was rich and important. That's why the Haluk stole my identity. Do you watch the news 
on Mama's TV? Did you ever see the man who uses my name? Saying what terrific 
people the Haluk really are?" 

"Never watch those talking-head dudes. Boring." But the boy's gaze had momentarily 
shifted. He'd seen Alistair Drummond, all right. 

"The fake Asahel Frost is a traitor," I said. "Crazy as an outhouse rat, and just as 
vicious. He wouldn't give a damn if Earth and all the human planets became alien 
property. I'm going to cut his nuts off and stuff them down his lying throat." 

A spark flickered in his bruised-looking young eyes. "Who lives in Cabbagetown?" he 
asked me abruptly. 

I told him. 

His mouth dropped open, showing the pathetic gaps in his teeth. Replacing them had 
been beyond Mama's skill. I wondered what else had been done to Mohammed in the 
world Upstairs. Who'd been responsible. Wondered whether I might do something about 
it someday, just as I intended to do something for Mama and the others if I ever became a 
man again. 

"You're shinin' me on." His skepticism was weakening. 

"Nope. God's own truth. I've got nowhere else to turn, Mohammed." 

He was silent, then: "The Haluk really did... that to you?" 

"They had help from some stupid and evil human beings. But, yeah. Haluk did it as 
part of their Grand Design to take over the damn galaxy. Some nerve, huh?" 

"Motherfuckers," he said, shaking his head. "It's for real? This alien plot?" 

"It's a nightmare, and it's for real." 

"Jeez." 

"I gave Mama Fanchon the opal ring," I said. "When we get to the place in 
Cabbagetown, I'll see that you get some money." 

"Okay," he said softly. "I'll take you where you want to go. You ruin those blueberry 
fools, hear me?" 

"That's my plan," I told him. "Now let's eat." 

Together, we went back to the dim corridor where the others were already sitting at 
the kitchen table. 

—— 

The next day, after Mama Fanchon checked me out again with the diagnosticon and 
gave her reluctant approval, we were ready to leave. Santa Claus had supplied us with a 


pack of food and bottles of water. He'd even refilled my flask with some of his own 
brandy. I wore my dark track suit over heavy polypro underwear from the hope chest, the 
new car-coat, the Blue Jays baseball cap, and gloves. Mohammed was all in black. He 
still had my Ivanov and the magazine pouch of stun-bolts. I was armed with the exotic 
switchblade and the sedative injector. (Mama didn't want that for her hospital. She 
preferred to use minidosers, which were much more common and easier to steal than 
high-pressure drug cartridges.) 

The whole Grange Place Tribe decided to accompany Mohammed and me as far as the 
old Spadina Street utility tunnel, which was to be our principal route south. Santa Claus 
led the way with his blaster. The girl runaway named Leah was at his side, lighting the 
way with a brilliant argon lantern. Most of the others had glolamps. Mama placidly 
smoked her pipe, walking with the Thrown Away Omnivore executive called Johnny 
Guitar, who strummed his instrument in solemn march tempo: brrrump, brrrump, brump-
brump-brump. Before long we were all whistling "Colonel Bogey." 

Weirdly, other troglodytic figures carrying lights of their own emerged from shadowy 
side tunnels to join us as we moved through the debris-strewn Dundas West concourse. 
When we reached the utility tunnel, a crowd of almost fifty people gathered around me, 
smiling and shyly wishing me good luck. I was astonished and deeply touched. 

"The word got around," Santa Claus explained. "Mohammed never could keep his 
mouth shut. These other folks ... they heard you were a Throwaway, heard what the 
Haluk did to you. Most of them know how it feels to have a good life, then wake up one 
day to find the universe turned upside down." 

So I made a little speech of my own, thanking them, making some wild promises that 
were greeted with disbelieving hoots and spatters of applause. Then the Dark Path people 
began to wander away. 

Mama Fanchon kissed me on the cheek and slipped something into my hand. "Here's 
what you wanted, Helly. My pocket phone. Take it with you. Not too many of these down 
here. Most of us haven't much need of them, but sometimes other tribes call me when a 
person's really sick or hurt bad." 

"I can't take this," I protested. "Let me make my call now, right here." 

"I don't think that would be wise. Wait till you're in Cab-bagetown, after you've 
checked the place for a stakeout. You'll want to be sure your friend is at home—and I'd 
also suggest that you give fair warning about your big surprise." She turned to 
Mohammed and spoke sternly. "And you won't take any money from Helly! Not a single 
dollar." 

He shrugged. "I'll bring back your phone." 

—— 

The journey was long, tedious, dirty, cold, and frequently dangerous. Our convoluted 
route covered over eight kilometers and took seventeen hours. I was strongly reminded of 
my trek through the caves of Cravat, several years earlier. But there had been no human 
crazies in that little planet's underworld; Branson Elgar and his homicidal crew had been 
extremely sane, and the Haluk hiding in the Cravat caverns were unexpectedly lacking in 
malice. 

On Toronto's Dark Path, there were malicious denizens galore. I never would have 
gotten to Cabbagetown without Mohammed. 

He knew exactly how to calm nervous tribes ready to kill any stranger—especially one 


that looked like an alien—who entered their territory. Mention of Mama Fanchon's name 
turned them from enemies to cautious allies. The roving gangs of well-armed robbers and 
sex criminals infesting undefended no-man's-land regions would have been more of a 
challenge; luckily, we didn't encounter large groups of outlaws during the southbound leg 
of our trip. 

Small groups and loners, yes. 

A pair of knife-wielding muggers sprang at us out of the dark when we were halfway 
down the Spadina tunnel, just above King Street. Mohammed stunned them neatly, and 
after fettering them with the plastic wrist restraints I'd taken from the Haluk guards, he 
called the nearest tribe on Mama Fanchon's phone and coolly asked for "garbage 
disposal." 

I didn't ask what that meant. 

We continued on. A few minutes later a third robber dropped on me from a ceiling 
beam in the ruined King Street subway station. We grappled while my young companion 
danced around waving the pistol, afraid to shoot for fear of hitting me. The thug was a 
raving crankhead, the drug giving him almost superhuman strength. I finally thumbed his 
eyes and he turned me loose, giving Mohammed his chance. He plugged my frenzied 
attacker with three darts. 

"That's usually fatal, you know," I told him when I managed to catch my breath. "Not 
that I'm complaining." 

"Then I guess we don't have to bother the disposal folks. The rats'11 take care of him." 
Mohammed helped himself to the late bandido's money and wristwatch before resuming 
his interrupted guide duties. 

Our narrowest escape happened hours later, down near the Inner Harbor, almost 
directly beneath what had once been Galapharma Tower. I presumed the structure now 
contained Rampart's Toronto headquarters, or would very shortly. In either case, the 
place offered me no refuge. Au contraire ... 

After a strenuous crawl through an abandoned sewer, we had come to a very old 
masonry culvert, part of some antiquated stream-diversion system buried deep under the 
old quay. The tall arched tunnel was half full of fast-moving black water. By that time I 
was exhausted, since we'd been on the go with hardly a letup for nearly eight hours. 

I rested on a wide ledge with a lantern perched beside me, while Mohammed searched 
with his flashlight for the improvised bridge over the stream that existed in Dark Path 
folklore—and also, we hoped, in reality. 

Suddenly, a pack of hideously diseased scavengers came rushing out of the darkness, 
screaming like wildcats, intent on separating us from our possessions. I think they were 
human, but the few glimpses I caught of them in the lamplight were inconclusive. We 
fought. I threw four of the smelly varmints into the rushing water, where they either 
drowned or ended up dog-paddling in Lake Ontario. Mohammed used the last of his 
Ivanov darts subduing the other five. 

We finally found the makeshift bridge, crossed over, and entered the Queen's Quay 
Dark Path. It was an abandoned goods-delivery system that once served waterfront 
buildings, now inhabited only by rats. They minded their own business and so did we, 
traveling eastward for three miserable kilometers through passages partially flooded with 
icy water. We nearly perished from hypothermia before finding a friendly tribe of 
genuine Indians, Throwaways from Infinitum, the gambling and entertainment colossus, 


near the Parliament Street junction. They let us dry out in front of their space heaters and 
gave us hot food and coffee. My Halukoid appearance didn't seem to bother them in the 
least. 

The last part of the trip was anticlimactic, 1,500 meters of dry storm drains—we were 
still beneath the force-field umbrella—cramped utility conduits with snarls of ancient 
fiberoptic and electrical cable, and the walled-off subbasements of vanished public 
housing units. 

We arrived in Cabbagetown shortly before midnight, emerging through a drain grate 
into a small park. 

"The town house you want is in the next block," Mohammed informed me. "Make 
your phone call." 

I sat in deep shadows with my back against a tree trunk. The little park was forlorn 
and deserted, its shrubs leafless, the flowerbeds empty, and the fountain turned off for the 
winter. 

Mohammed crouched beside me. "Go ahead," he urged. "What are you waiting for? I 
want to get home tonight." 

I hesitated because I was afraid. The long, perilous journey hadn't terrified me, but the 
prospect of making this phone call did. I stalled. "How do you expect to get back to 
Grange Place tonight? It's too far. Too dangerous." 

"Damn right it is, man. But only if you take the Dark Path. I'm going to walk 
crosstown on the surface, right down Dundas Street for three klicks, till I get to Spadina 
and our regular bolt-hole. It'll be a breeze, now that I don't have a fuckin' Haluk fugitive 
in tow. Make the phone call!" 

Dex Assistance gave me the code. I tapped it in, keeping the viewer inactive. Got an 
answer and a face. 

"Yes? Who is this, please?" 

"It's Helly," I whispered. "I need to see you immediately." 

"Helly?" 

"Please listen. I'm in trouble. Serious trouble. You know what—what's going on in the 
Assembly. The free-for-all about the three hundred new Haluk planets. My own close 
involvement as Rampart syndic." 

"Yes. But I don't see—" 

"The demiclone spy accusations. They're true. The—The person using my name, 
giving statements to the media, is an impostor. A clone. I've been kept prisoner by the 
Haluk for seven months while this other man has used my identity to discredit Efrem 
Sontag's investigation." 

A protracted silence. "This isn't... some sick practical joke?" 

"No. It's true. I only escaped from the Haluk tower a few days ago. I've been hiding in 
the Dark Path. Under the city." 

"Good God. And you want—" 

"Your help. Please. There's no one else I can turn to. No one who would believe me." 

"Your voice—" 

"I know. I've been through hell. It's not the only thing about me that's changed. But I 
can prove who I am. Here's a secret password: Kashagawigamog." 

"The lake where you almost drowned when you were five years old." 

"Where Eve saved my life, then beat the shit out of me for disobeying orders and 


going out in the canoe alone, without a life vest. I told you about it when we visited that 
art gallery in Haliburton." 

Another interminable pause, then: "All right. I'll listen to what you have to say. Come 
to my town house. Do you know where it is?" 

"Yes. I'm only a block away. I'll use the back door. You wouldn't want your neighbors 
to see me coming in." 

"Why not?" 

"Trust me." 

"Very well. I'll leave the rear garden gate unlocked. Come through the alley." 

"There's something I have to warn you about. My appearance. I don't want to frighten 
you, but—" 

"I don't frighten easily. You of all people ought to know that." 

"Yes. I'm sorry. But I'd better show you what was done to me by the Haluk. I'm not 
the man you remember." I activated my viewer pickup. 

"Jesus Christ," Joanna whispered. 

"They demicloned a Haluk, gave him my DNA. This— This change is a side effect of 
the genen process." 

Her eyes were full of sudden tears. "Oh, Helly!" 

My name. She used my name. "It is me, Joanna. I need you so very much." 

"Come," my former wife said. 

So I did. 


Chapter 8 

 

I jogged wearily toward Joanna's place with my baseball cap pulled low, praying I 
wouldn't meet another night-runner who'd notice my filthy athletic clothes and outlandish 
features. I figured the chance of Haluk agents physically watching her place was 
vanishingly remote. More subtle varieties of spying were possible—even satellite eyes. 
But I'd had no relationship with Joanna for years, and I was fairly certain that the aliens 
would have discounted her as someone I'd call on for help. They'd be concentrating their 
surveillance efforts on Karl Nazarian and my other associates, on my family, and on 
Efrem Sontag. 

That night, the pleasant streets of Cabbagetown seemed almost deserted. Paving-stone 
sidewalks, lamp posts that simulated gaslights, big old trees. A two-meter-high 
ornamental iron fence surrounded each row of town houses. The locked gates in front of 
each unit had security boxes with viewscreens. Following inner-city guidelines, there was 
no private hopper pad anywhere nearby. You didn't fly into affluent enclaves like 
Cabbagetown; you drove or cycled or walked, and you didn't leave your vehicle parked 
overnight in front of the house, either. 

There were six large town houses in Joanna's row, built in the gracious style of the 
previous century—gray clapboard facades, heavy white window frames, overhanging 
eaves, attic dormers on the third floor, multiple chimneys, little sheltering porticos with 
hanging lanterns above each front door. The houses shared a two-story mews in the rear 
that had garage space for twelve cars below, exercise and hobby rooms upstairs. 

I jogged around onto a side street and entered the alley. The mews building sported 
brass carriage lamps. A single gate beside it gave admittance to the communal garden. 
The telltale on its card-lock box glowed green, and when I tried the gate, it swung open 
silently. 

Her back porch light hadn't been turned on and the lower part of her house was dark. 
Blinds were drawn in two illuminated rooms on the second floor. 

I crept up the steps. Before I could touch the bell pad, the door opened and I saw a tall, 
slender woman silhouetted against indirect light from an inner hall. She wore a tightly 
belted crimson velvet robe over a high-necked white nightgown. Her blond hair was still 
long, as I had remembered it. Freed from its chignon, a single glossy braid fell over her 
right breast. 

She stared at me, austere features shadowed, eyes wide and touched with twin sparks 
from the carriage lights, lips parted in a soundless cry of trepidation. My grotesque face 
seen on a small phone viewer lacked the impact of solid, atrocious reality. 

"It's me, Joanna," I said gently. "It really is me." 

"Yes. Come in." Her voice was steady. She stepped aside as I entered and then locked 
the door. For a few seconds we stood still, studying each other in the half-light like 
cornball characters from an old grade-B science-fiction movie: the attractive woman in 
her nightclothes and the monstrous alien intruder. 

Then she said, "Phew! Why didn't you tell me you'd been hiding in a sewer?" Before I 
could reply, she strode off briskly. "Come with me. Before we do anything else, you've 
got to have a long, hot shower." 

I followed meekly through the kitchen and up the back staircase to a sumptuous 
bathroom on the second floor. "Put those nasty clothes of yours into the valet and use the 


DISINFECT setting. You'd better program a serious germkiller bodyscrub, too. The shower 
has an enormous spritz selection—although I can't say I've ever had to use the industrial-
strength option myself. There are guest toiletries in the large cabinet. Toothbrushes and 
the like." She paused and gave me a quizzical look. "Umm ... you do still have teeth?" 

I burst out laughing and bared them in an un-Haluk grin. They felt like my originals, 
even though the spaces between them appeared to have expanded. Then I playfully stuck 
my tongue out at her as well, and instantly regretted it. Earlier, I'd vaguely felt that the 
organ was a tad abnormal. Now the mirrors in the bright bathroom revealed that it had 
become obscenely long and agile. I could easily touch the underside of my chin with it. 
And it was colored a rich plum-purple. 

"Holy shit!" said Joanna DeVet, Morehouse Professor of Political Science. She backed 
away from me into the hall. When I made a piteous noise she forced herself to smile. "It's 
not such a bad tongue. Rather handsome, as those things go. Can you unfurl it like a 
chameleon and catch flies?" 

"I'll have to give that a try one of these days," I said wretchedly. 

"I'm sorry, Helly. I shouldn't joke about it. It's just so ..." 

"Alien," I said softly. 

"Yes," she agreed. "Are you hungry? Can you eat human food?" 

"My last meal was rat stew, dished out by feral Native Americans living in waterfront 
catacombs. I'm famished." 

"I have half a tandoori chicken with spicy yogurt sauce, nan bread, and rozkoz-
poppyseed coffee cake from Granowska's." Joanna hated to cook, but she knew the best 
takeout and home-delivery places in the city. 

I said, "The chicken sounds just great." 

"Is there anything else you need, dear?" 

She said it so sweetly, with such natural, heartfelt concern, that I felt my throat tighten 
and my eyes begin to fog. 

Oh, Joanna. Why had I been such a self-centered fool? 

But there was no time now for sentimentality. In spite of her composed demeanor, my 
former wife was undoubtedly in a state of profound emotional turmoil. I had to keep her 
calm if she was going to be of any use to me. 

Use. 

That was the only reason I'd come to her, right? Not for asylum and solace, but for 
help in resuming my quixotic crusade against the Haluk. So I'd better get on with it... 

"Does your phone have Phase XII encryption capability?" I asked. 

"Yes. I've never used that, either." She sighed. "I suppose we're about to go into 
serious cloak-and-dagger mode." 

"Call the Interstellar Commerce Secretariat Forensic Division. Ask for the emergency 
voice mail of Chief Superintendent Beatrice Mangan. She's the head of the ICS molecular 
biology department and an old colleague of mine who knows all about the Haluk 
demiclone threat." 

"Yes, I know who she is. She was one of the most impressive witnesses during 
Delegate Sontag's open committee sessions, testifying about the demiclone corpse." 

I went on. "Show your face and transmit your iris ID, then leave a message asking Bea 
to call you at home as soon as possible, max encrypt." 

"Do I mention your name?" 


"Absolutely not. You're going to have to be my mouthpiece for a while until I gain 
credibility. Somehow, without telling Bea anything about me or my situation, get her to 
come to your house early tomorrow. It's imperative that she not be followed, and I don't 
want her to risk coming at night. The Haluk are certain to have her under surveillance. 
Ask her to bring a portable genetic assay kit with her, and a phone with a datalink to 
ICS." 

"I see where you're going. Your DNA will identify you positively." 

"Even better. Bea can confirm that the Haluk embellishments in my genome are the 
result of an illegal demicloning procedure." 

"What will you do then—go to the media?" 

"Eventually. There are more urgent matters to take care of. I've been in a dystasis tank 
for seven months, and I need to get back up to speed on current events before I make any 
drastic moves. For that I could use your help, Joanna. If you're willing." 

"Of course. I have a large library of reference materials here. I can provide you with 
whatever information you need." 

"As soon as Bea Mangan is ready to vouch for me, I intend to show myself to 
Delegate Efrem Sontag and my close associate Karl Nazarian—perhaps to Eve and my 
father as well. We'll work together to decide the best way of blitzing the blueberries. 
Don't worry, we won't use your house as our command post. I won't endanger you, any 
more than I have already by simply coming here." 

"I'm willing to take risks, Helly," she said simply. "If it will help you." 

Her unexpected loyalty struck me mute, shamed me. 

"Joanna. Thank you. But I've got to get out of Toronto. The capital's a hotbed of 
Haluk. Everyone knows that their embassy staff and trade delegation number in the 
thousands. And I'd bet the ranch that a sizable percentage of them are out beating the 
bushes for me right now." 

"What about the Haluk impostor using your identity? He's been very plausible, you 
know. I certainly would never have doubted him." 

"The active Fake Helly demiclone isn't an alien. He's a transmuted human. The Haluk 
made two copies of me." 

"Don't you want to expose him at once?" 

"I'll need help blowing the whistle on this guy. He's more than a Haluk apologist and 
secret agent—he's dangerously insane." 

"You know that for a fact?" 

"Oh, yes. And I'm not the only one who thinks so." 

"Who in the world is this monster of depravity?" 

"Alistair Drummond, the former Gala CEO. He didn't die in Arizona." 

"Good heavens!" She thought about it for a moment. "How ... absolutely perfect." 

"I'm sure the Haluk thought so, too, when Drummond presented his ingenious little 
scheme to their leadership. They also realized that the man is a ticking timebomb, and 
planned to replace him with a more trustworthy Fake Helly as soon as possible. A Haluk 
demiclone. That won't happen now. My second clone is very, very dead." I couldn't help 
the grim satisfaction in my voice. 

Joanna gave me a look. Political scientists aren't slow to grasp unpleasant tactical 
realities. "So the Haluk are stuck with Drummond, who no doubt has an agenda of his 
own." 


"Damned right he does. When he tricked Eve and the Rampart board into making him 
president of the Concern, he put himself in a position to do immense damage. With the 
Galapharma consolidation, there are now nearly six thousand planets under Rampart 
control. Drummond has access to databases for all of them. He can control their starship 
fleets, their internal and external defenses, even their management rosters. For all we 
know, he might have put Haluk demiclone moles into top executive positions in Rampart 
Tower and on significant numbers of Rampart worlds in both the Perseus Spur and the 
Orion Arm. He's had plenty of time. Personnel reshuffling during the consolidation 
would have made his actions seem logical. I'm sure he's also used his position as 
Corporate Syndic to promote the Haluk cause effectively among the Assembly 
Delegates." 

She nodded. "He's been very ardent in his defense of the aliens, personally appealing, 
utterly convincing. Certainly no one would ever suspect him of being—" She touched the 
side of her head. 

"A flaming nutcase? Hardly. When he organized the Rampart takeover conspiracy, he 
was motived by hubris and overweening ambition. Now, I suspect he's out for revenge—
against me, against Rampart, perhaps even against the entire human race. We can't 
simply discredit Drummond and expect him to quietly surrender. He'll find ways to fight 
back the minute he realizes he and his Haluk allies are being seriously threatened. There 
may be only one practical way to deal with him." 

"I see." And she did, too. "You and your friends are going to be facing some tricky 
realpolitik decisions. The Assembly vote on the new Haluk planets is expected very soon. 
Perhaps within two weeks." 

"We've got to shoot that bill down, Joanna." I spoke with desperate urgency. "The 
aliens can't be allowed to bring vast numbers of colonists into the Spur. With 
Drummond's help, they'd find a way to seize all of Zone 23. And that's not even the worst 
of it. The Haluk have a secret base in a Sagittarian asteroid. Last April their pirates were 
using it to hijack Sheltok transactinide carriers. By now the damn place might have been 
expanded into a staging point for an all-out attack against our starship fuel supply." 

"Helly, this is appalling! You'll have to go to the media at once. Concentrating your 
efforts on the Assembly members themselves might not be effective. The Hundred 
Concerns want the Haluk colony bill to pass. A majority of the Delegates will bow to 
their pressure unless the constituency absolutely forces them to do otherwise." 

"Through media exposure." 

"Yes. The Commonwealth constitution has provisions for a citizen referendum under 
certain circumstances. But the Assembly itself must—" 

I interrupted her, suddenly overcome by a crushing fatigue that was both physical and 
mental. "Later, Joanna. 

Please. I know Sontag and the others will welcome your expert advice. We'll talk 
about all that tomorrow. But for now, just convince Bea Mangan to come over here in the 
morning. Before I can do anything else, I have to prove that I exist." 

"I'll call her at once." Impulsively, she extended her hand. I took it very carefully in 
my inhuman blue one, bowed my head over it in an archaic gesture of courtesy that 
seemed instinctive, and released it. 

Joanna blinked, then let her gaze fall. "I'll bring the food to my little sitting room at the 
end of the hall." She turned away and went down the back stairs. 


I closed the bathroom door and stripped, inserting my grimy clothes and footgear into 
the valet machine as she'd instructed me. Then I stepped into the shower and did my best 
to wash everything away. 

It didn't work, of course. 

—— 

She was waiting when I padded into the sitting room in my stocking feet. The soaked 
and battered Adidas hadn't survived the valet's attentions and the car-coat was beyond 
salvage; but the other clothing I'd appropriated from Dan was fresh and clean again. 

A thought of my wayward brother had flitted briefly through my mind as I dressed. I'd 
wondered if the Haluk had interrogated him yet. There was nothing he could say that 
would help the aliens find me, but they might persist in the questioning anyhow. Too bad 
for Dan ... 

"You smell much better," Joanna remarked. "Don't tell me you used the lavender bath 
oil." 

"I needed some soothing aromatherapy," I said, trying to sound casual. "You know I 
always liked lavender. It makes me feel relaxed." And horny, worse luck. 

Three couches were grouped in a U shape before a tall holoscreen. She'd programmed 
an underwater scene, blue-black tropical water with a school of gleaming opal moon-
jellies rising and falling languidly amid ghostly spires of coral. The music was strange, 
soft blooming chords that might have been Olivier Messaien. 

"I like the holo," I said. "It almost reminds me of home. Kedge-Lockaby, that is. The 
freesoil Perseus world where I lived. Except the planet's sea never evolved jellyfish." 

"Is it a very beautiful place?" Joanna asked me. 

"Oh, yes." 

"And you were happy there." 

"Not at first. Later, when I got my head back together, I was very happy." 

The food waited in a covered hotdish on a low table in front of the couches. I sat 
across from her, noted the unfolded vidphone sitting beside a carafe of coffee and a bottle 
of Jameson whiskey. 

"Bea Mangan hasn't returned your call yet?" I inquired. 

"Yes, she did. She'll be here tomorrow morning at seven, with the genetic assay 
equipment. She said she'd take a taxi from ICS Tower." 

"That should be safe enough in daylight if she takes precautions." 

"Helly ... I'm afraid she guessed the truth. I'm sorry if it upsets your plans. I never 
hinted—" 

"It's all right. I might have known Bea would figure it out. After all, she's a cop." 

"She wants to talk to you right away. She said it was extremely urgent." 

"Rats." It had to be bad news. I knocked my fist against my ridged forehead, trying 
vainly to jump-start my brain. Switched the phone's viewer option off and went through 
the encrypt rigmarole. Bea picked up on the first buzz. 

"Beatrice Mangan here." 

"It's Helly. The weird voice goes with the rest of my Halukoid ensemble." 

"So the aliens subjected you to the preliminary genen procedure—" 

"Yes. And I escaped. Pardon me for not doing a vis-a-vis, but I'm really tired of being 
blue and hearing about it." 

Her warm, maternal face was full of sympathy. "How awful for you. I'll do whatever I 


can to help. You know that." 

"Thanks, Bea. Just verify my DNA tomorrow. After that I'll be getting in touch with 
Ef Sontag and some others to work out a plan of action. I haven't decided yet whether to 
go to the media right away or wait a couple of weeks to make my big revelation just 
before the Assembly vote on the Haluk colonies. In either case, I'd like you to redo my 
genetic profile in public, as part of the big show." 

"Helly, that's why I wanted to speak to you immediately. Joanna mentioned the 
Assembly vote, too. But you won't have two weeks to prepare for it. Ef Sontag called me 
earlier this evening and told me that the Conservatives suddenly forced cloture on the 
Haluk colony debate. They passed a resolution calling for a vote on Wednesday, the day 
after tomorrow." 

"No!" I whispered. "No no no." 

There goes the ball game: Haluk-300, Humans-0. 

Bea said, "On Tuesday, tomorrow, Ef and his group will be allowed to present a 
summary of their opposition. He asked me to appear as an expert witness reiterating the 
Brown Fleece cadaver evidence. The pro-Haluk committee will then do their own final 
summation. The Speaker will call for the vote promptly at 1000 hours on Wednesday 
morning." 

"I know why the debate was squelched," I said dully. "The Haluk leadership hit the 
panic button after I escaped. They were afraid they wouldn't recapture me before I blew 
the lid off." 

"I'm sure you're right about that. The Servant of Servants and the entire Haluk Council 
of Nine are here in Toronto. I've seen them myself in the Assembly Chamber VIP 
observation gallery." 

"The Servant would be in a position to add threats to the usual Haluk lobbying efforts 
with the Hundred Concerns. The corporate Syndics squeezed the pocket Delegates to 
force the early vote. Shit! This probably means that a majority of the Assembly will 
approve the colonies, too." 

"Ef thought so. But I think you should talk to him, Helly. He's spending the night in 
Government House with his staff, working on last ditch tactics. Perhaps—" 

"Sorry. That's a no-go. I'm totally exhausted. Too strung out to think straight." 

The metaphoric black pit yawned in front of me, and oblivion had never looked so 
appealing. I'd go into hiding, fight the impossible fight some other day ... 

But Bea was saying, "Why don't I go to Ef early tomorrow, break the news about your 
return, and ask him to come along to Professor DeVet's house with me?" 

"If his office has a demi mole—" I objected. 

"All of Ef's people give DNA samples every week, and he has stringent security 
monitoring. There's no mole. If the Haluk do have his offices under surveillance, it can 
only be the crudest kind of corridor peeping. I can get him out of there cleanly, Helly. 
Trust me." 

"I do ... But damn it all to hell, Bea! What can we hope to accomplish in one day? Ef 
can present me to the Assembly as Exhibit A and I can give a nice little speech. But 
would it really make any difference in the voting?" 

Joanna suddenly said, "Pocket Delegates, Helly. Rampart's own." 

Stupid stupid. I didn't get it. "What?" 

On the phone, Bea echoed, "What?" 


I activated the speaker option and Joanna spoke louder. 

"There are a substantial number of Delegates beholden to Rampart now, following the 
Galapharma consolidation. Those votes can be swayed if you undercut Drummond's 
influence immediately, by removing him from the syndic post and replacing him with an 
ally. Can't you think of some sneaky lawyerish way of doing it so you wouldn't have to 
confront the impostor himself?" 

I finally understood what she was saying. The logjam in my cerebrum exploded in a 
flash of fresh hope. "Christ! If it could only work!" 

I'd persisted in thinking of Rampart as it used to be, a beleaguered little outfit without 
political influence. Before the consolidation, the Rampart worlds of Zone 23 had rated a 
meager four Commonwealth Assembly votes under the complex allocation formula that 
took into consideration both population and corporate worth. With Galapharma's pocket 
Delegates added in, the total would now be eighty or ninety. It might be enough— 

Bea Mangan's incredulous voice interrupted my train of thought. "Did I hear Professor 
DeVet mention Alistair Drummond?" 

"He's me," I said tersely. "Fake Helly the First. There was also a Haluk copy of me. It 
died. If you want the complete scoop on Asahel in Demicloneland, I'll tell you 
tomorrow." 

Joanna brought us back to the point. "How does a Concern oust its syndic?" 

"According to Rampart's bylaws," I said, "he's customarily appointed or dismissed by 
the president. A simple majority vote of the Board of Directors can also do it. Drummond 
is president as well as syndic and he won't fire himself, so that leaves the board. Gunter 
Eckert, the chairman, can call an emergency meeting. But I'll tell you ladies right now 
that a hardheaded old businessman like Eckert won't accept me as the real Helly unless he 
sees a DNA assay done right before his eyes and then has me interrogated with a 
psychotronic probe." 

"Then do it," Joanna said. 

I had to laugh at her naivete. "I don't even know Gunter's goddamned personal code! 
He's certainly ex-database. But that's moot. We'll never get him to call a meeting or 
watch the assay because he'll never believe that the Asahel Frost who's President of 
Rampart is an impostor. He won't want to believe it. Neither will Eve, or my father, or 
any of the other directors. Because if it's true, and the Haluk get their shit blown out of 
the water, Rampart stands to lose more than any of the other Hundred Concerns. There's 
no one on the board who—" 

I shut my mouth, overcome with the abrupt realization that I was wrong. There was 
someone. 

"Helly?" Bea Mangan said anxiously. 

"I just had a thought. I'll have to follow through on it. The odds are long, but the 
Rampart situation might not be completely hopeless after all. Listen, Bea. You come here 
tomorrow with Ef Sontag and your genetic profiling equipment. And I'd also like you to 
bring a Hogan H-18 miniaturized low-power psychotronic interrogation device." 

"Of course. I can borrow one from Enforcement. Is there anything else?" 

"Pray," I said, and told her goodbye. 

Joanna regarded me with a puzzled expression. I said, "Give me a minute." Then I sat 
still, closed my eyes, and tried to remember a phone code, unlisted, that I'd used only 
once before, months ago. A code that might mean the difference between galactic war or 


peace. 

Got it, you crafty blue bastard, you! 

I tapped the pads. This time I left the viewer turned on. There was no need for extra 
encryption. The man I was calling had the best personal security in the universe. 

He answered his phone, stared at me, and said, "Good God in heaven!" 

"No, sir," I corrected him. "Helly Frost, back from a very bad trip. Captured by the 
enemy in the Sagittarius Whorl. Demicloned and horribly transmogrified by Haluk 
villains. But my Barky Hunt wasn't a fiasco. I got the answers we were looking for. Do 
you want to hear about it?" 

"Yes," said Adam Stanislawski evenly. "If you can prove you are who you say you 
are." No hesitation, no emotional dithering. He weighed Drumrnond's Helly persona 
against my unlikely claim and was willing to keep an open mind! What a guy ... 

"Have you ever heard of Joanna DeVet, Morehonse Professor of Poli Sci at 
Commonwealth University?" 

"The former wife of Asahel Frost. I've read several of her books. Thought they were 
brilliant." 

"I'm at her house in Cabbagetown. If you come here tomorrow morning at about 0700 
hours, I'll prove who I am with a DNA test and a truth machine. After that I'd like you to 
get hold of your man John Ellington, Vice Chairman of Rampart. Have him force Gunter 
Eckert to call an immediate emergency meeting of Rampart's Board of Directors—
without the participation of the individual presently masquerading as Asahel Frost." 

Stanislawski frowned thoughtfully, then a broad smile broke over his shrewd, guarded 
features. "I see. Turning the pocket Delegates, eh?" 

"There ain't no flies on you, sir. You guessed it. It was Joanna's idea." 

"Is Professor DeVet there? Let me talk to her." 

I pushed the phone in front of her. She said, "Good evening, Citizen Stanislawski. 
Thank you for your kind words about my books. I'm rather surprised, since they condemn 
the coercive role of business in galactic politics. I'm even more surprised that my former 
husband should have contacted you under these extreme circumstances." 

"Is it really Helly?" 

"Absolutely. Escaped from Haluk durance vile. They cloned him." 

"I'll be damned. Tell me how to get to your house." 

She did. "Until seven tomorrow, then, citizen." 

"I'm really looking forward to it, Professor." 

She ended the call, folded the phone, and uncovered the dish of chicken. 

"Eat your food now, while it's hot. Would you like an Irish coffee? I'm going to have 
one. Maybe several. It's decaf, so it won't prevent you from sleeping." She picked up the 
carafe and began filling a glass mug. 

Sleep! With my brain fumbling to process the stunning developments of the past half 
hour, there was small hope of that. But I said, "Sounds good to me, babe." 

She partially filled both mugs from the carafe, stirred in a little sugar, added generous 
measures of whiskey, inverted a spoon and used it to carefully float a layer of heavy 
cream on top. We lifted the mugs and tapped them together, simultaneously murmuring, 
"Cheers." Sipped, avoiding each other's eyes. 

I began picking dutifully at the food. The baked chicken was meltingly tender and 
delicious, but I had no appetite. I should have made small talk, asked about her work at 


Commonwealth University, her life during the years we'd been apart. 

I couldn't. The nearness of her, the very real possibility that I'd be killed tomorrow by 
alien agents or the hirelings of Alistair Drummond—even the lingering scent of the 
goddamned lavender bath oil—had cranked up my blood pressure to the point where I 
didn't even trust myself to speak to the woman seated across the table from me. 

I wanted her so much. 

Goofy old human nature has a paradoxical instinct that sometimes asserts itself under 
circumstances of impending peril: before the male Neanderthal goes out to hunt the 
mammoth, before the knight sallies forth against the invincible foe, before the Sioux 
warrior meets the Seventh Cavalry, before battered Blue Supercop charges blindly into 
the lair of the corporate bad guys. 

But this time around my body's urgent need to reaffirm life was doomed to frustration. 
If it was only a need, and not a symptom of something deeper ... 

Seeing my alien hands clumsily manipulating the knife and fork, painfully conscious 
of the awful face that had stared back at me from the bathroom mirror, I was prey to a 
burning sense of self-loathing and despair that was only partially associated with my 
horrifying appearance. I had rejected my wife out of stupid pride, denied my feelings for 
her because I had been afraid, come back to her only as a last resort. 

Persons I'd respected had told me that I had never stopped loving Joanna: Mimo 
Bermudez, Matilde Gregoire, my sister Eve. I'd denied it with all my strength, even as I 
kept the two wedding rings on their platinum chain. I was still trying to deny it, now that 
we were together again and the situation was hopeless. 

I was no longer a man, and yet I was. 

Joanna sat in apparent ease, bare feet crossed at the ankles, red velvet robe falling 
away from her white gown, watching the drifting moon-jellies when it became evident 
that I was incapable of conversation. Finally I couldn't eat any more. She cleared the table 
and put the dirty dishes into a dumbwaiter. 

"Would you like another Irish coffee, Helly?" So polite and compassionate toward the 
poor freak. 

"Yes, please. No cream this time." 

She handed the cup to me but didn't resume her seat, walking instead to the windows 
overlooking the street and briefly parting the drapes. "This is a very safe part of the city, 
regularly patrolled and well-equipped with security devices. I'm sure you'll be all right 
staying with me." 

"Just show me the guest room," I said. "Or I can lie down here on one of the couches." 

"You're welcome to stay as long as you like," she insisted. "If we're careful, there's no 
reason why any of your enemies should suspect you're here. I'd also be happy to help 
with your ... appointments at Rampart Tower and the Assembly tomorrow." 

"I couldn't possibly jeopardize your safety or impose on you any more than I already 
have." 

"But where will you go?" She seemed genuinely concerned. "Helly, there'll be a media 
frenzy! And you'll be in danger from Drummond and the Haluk, no matter how the vote 
goes." 

"I have a hiding place in mind," I said brusquely. "Don't worry about me." After I'd 
done what I could in Toronto, I'd go to the place I'd thought of earlier. My first idea had 
been to retreat to Karl Nazarian's fortified cottage; but I'd rejected that idea instantly. It 


would be one of the first places my enemies would look. 

And Karl might have already gone the way of Jake Silver ... 

I drank down the last of the coffee, gabbling about how grateful I was to Joanna for 
her kindness. If she wanted to do more, she could provide me with a file of news 
magazines and holovid newscasts. I'd spend the night skimming them, since I doubted I'd 
be able to sleep. 

"Poor Helly," she said, smiling. "I'll gladly do that for you if you wish. But there are 
better ways to relax." She untied her robe, slipped it off, and tossed it onto a chair. Then 
she began to undo the long golden braid of her hair. 

The coffee cup almost fell out of my hand. I said, "Joanna." 

She said, "My dear. I've missed you so very much." 

"No," I moaned. Alien flesh, human hormones. Oh, God. I was coming alive again. 
They were. 

"Let me see you." She had turned off the room lamps with a snap of her fingers and 
was undoing the front buttons of her demure white nightdress one by one. It was made of 
some delicate opaque fabric, with soft lace at the wrists and collar. The only illumination 
came from the opalescent sea creatures that seemed to float in the virtual water behind 
her. I could see the thrust of her nipples, her shining eyes. 

"I'm hideous," I said hoarsely. "Changed. You don't understand." 

She shook her head, the smile widening. "You're intriguing. A fantasy come alive. 
Don't tell me you've never thought about such things. All human beings have." 

The gown fell to the floor. Her wonderful body was the same as always, pale and 
glowing, with an ash-blond ecu that matched her long hair. She lowered the zipper of my 
track suit, removed the jacket, slipped her cool hands under my T-shirt and lifted it. 

"Oh!" Not revolted, interested. Caressing my chest's bizarre cobalt trapunto ridges, the 
twin rows of vestigial mammaries like ornate golden buttons on a hussar's coat. "What in 
the world are these?" 

"Fuckin' extras," I muttered. "The damned Haluk have litters." She pulled the T-shirt 
off. "And that's not the worst of it. Please don't—" 

She was fitting her hands around my stupid wasp waist. "That's amazing! How in the 
world does it accommodate your diaphragm and digestive tract?" 

"I don't know! Joanna, for the love of God—" 

She took my face in both hands, drew it down and kissed me, long and slow, savoring 
the alien juices of my mouth, accepting the responding thrusts of my awful tongue, 
crushing her body eagerly against mine, feeling my erection but still not aware of the 
ultimate indignity. 

"Now," she said at last, drawing me to the large central couch. Her eyes were like 
stars. "My love. My dearest alien love." 

Despairing, desperate, on the brink, I said, "Look!" 

Tore off the rest of my clothing and let her see me naked. 

"Two?" she whispered in disbelief. "But how—" 

"I don't know!" I roared, feeling tears of frustrated lust start from my eyes. "I don't 
know!" 

"Then we'll have to experiment," she said. Her face was radiant and her touch gentle. 
"The entire ensemble is more streamlined. Elegant. Very different, of course, but actually 
quite beautiful." 


"Beautiful....?" 

"Hush now," she said, and began the experimentation. 

—— 

I crept out of her bed shortly after 0500 hours, leaving her deep in sleep, and had a 
quick shower. After collecting my clothes from the sitting room and putting them on, I 
took the phone down to the kitchen to make my call to Karl Nazarlan. 

Once again I cut out the video option. Before entering his personal code, I 
programmed an emergency voice-mail override and activated his ringer. Then I held my 
breath as the buzzing began. 

Be there, old friend. Don't be dead because of me. 

His face appeared, puffy from slumber and mad as a hornet. "Who's there? Do you 
know what friggin' time it is?" 

I said, "It's five twenty-two on a dark November morning." 

"Show your face, you inconsiderate bastard!" he raged. "Hector, if this is you calling 
from that goddamned deer-camp of yours, I'm going to wring your bloody black neck." 

"It's not Hector." I tried to make my voice sound as normal as possible. "Engage Phase 
XII encryption, Karl. Do it now. Someone might be listening." 

I heard cursing, some of it in a language that might have been Armenian, then the 
signals indicating that the call was secure. 

"Well?" Karl snarled. "If you know me, you know that nobody ever, ever taps my 
phone. Who the hell is this?" 

"It's Helly Frost. The real one, not the demiclone fake who's been masquerading as me 
for the past half year." 

"The real—" 

"Asahel Ethan Frost, alias Helmut Icicle, alias Cap'n Helly, the fish-flickin' fool of 
Eyebrow Cay, freesoil planet Kedge-Lockaby, Zone 23, Perseus Spur." 

"Oh, my God!" 

"The Haluk bagged me out in Sagittarius and made a Helly demiclone. I finally 
escaped from the xenos a few days ago—and I'm ringy, riled, and swoll up with mad like 
a chuckwalla lizard trapped in a fuckin' hobnail boot!" 

"It's you, all right," Karl conceded after a brief, incredulous silence. "Now that I think 
about it, your double never did quite come across as a proper cowboy." 

"I'll bet. The fictitious gent hi question is none other than our old chum, Alistair 
Drummond." 

"Christ on a crutch! They turned Drummond into a demi of you?" 

"Yeah. I'm going to have a devil of a job taking him down, too. But I'll do it or die 
trying." 

"That sneaking bastard! He did an incredible job. Played you to the hilt. I don't mind 
telling you it nearly broke my heart when it seemed you were repudiating all the evidence 
against the Haluk that we sweated blood for. I had to figure you'd sold out to protect 
Rampart's bottom line. You want to tell me the whole story?" 

"Later. I need your help, Karl. Right now, if you can manage it." 

"Where you calling from?" 

"I'm at my ex-wife's place in Toronto." I gave him the address, told hun about the lack 
of adjacent hopper pads, pleaded with him to come as soon as possible, as clandestinely 
as possible, in a ground vehicle. 


"No problem at all. My girlfriend has a catering business. I'll borrow one of her vans." 

"Girlfriend?" Karl had been a solitary widower for as long as I'd known him. 

"Lots of things happened while you were floating. Some good, some not so good. 
What do you need? Weapons?" 

"An Ivanov Squire will suffice. I also need a phone primed with a new personal 
code—use the name Helmut Icicle. Get into Rampart's database, retrieve all my old dex 
listings and links, and install them in the new phone." 

"Uh-huh. Anything else?" 

"A set of full soft body armor, size XLT; a regular Anonyme anorak in XL; a pair of 
lightweight mittens; a sturdy pair of boots, size twelve medium. Oh, yes. Another set of 
Joru robes. No makeup or fright-wig necessary this time." 

I told him briefly what I hoped to accomplish that day at Rampart Tower and at the 
Commonwealth Assembly. He uttered a disappointed expletive when I told him how tight 
the time frame was for scrubbing the new Haluk colonies, and wanted to know how the 
interactive citizen vote could be invoked. 

"I don't know that much about it. You can ask Joanna to explain the thing when you 
get here. Watch your back en route. The Haluk probably have had you under surveillance 
for several days, ever since I broke out of their embassy in Macpherson Tower." 

"The day I can't slip a tail is the day I get fitted for my halo and start taking harp 
lessons. Is there anything else I can bring you?" 

"No, but there are a couple of other things you can do. Do you remember the report I 
sent you on the Sheltok carrier pirate attack?" 

"The Haluk corsairs operating in the Sag? Sure. I certified it." 

"Can you access it quickly and send a copy to Ef Sontag's office?" 

He didn't reply immediately. Then: "Yes, I can do that. What else?" 

"After today's action, I'm going to hide out for a little while until things cool off. I'll 
need a fast, well-armed hopper. I'd like you to requisition one of Rampart's big 
Garrisons—" 

"Sorry," Karl said. "Can't do that. Your alter ego cost me my job. A couple of weeks 
before you supposedly returned from the death-traps of Sagittarius and turned into a 
raving capitalist, I came down with a mysterious virus that the Rampart medics couldn't 
cure. I was bounced from my vice-presidency with a nice pension that I never thought I'd 
live to spend. Big surprise! When I went to an independent physician for treatment, the 
deadly bug turned up its toes. How do you like that shit? Fake Helly and his friends were 
clearing the decks." 

That explained his hesitation about the Sheltok report. He'd have to hack it out of the 
Rampart database, along with my phone files. I had no doubt that he'd do the job 
immaculately. 

"I suppose Lotte, Cassius, and Hector were deep-sixed along with you," I said. 

"Correct. They're all living in the area, retired and bored stiff. You got something in 
mind?" 

"I'll need the entire staff of your old Department of Special Projects immediately—
provided I can pull off a certain ploy over at Rampart this morning. Put your folks on 
alert, but warn them it's gonna be balls-to-the-walls this time. I suspect Rampart may be 
infested with other demiclones besides Fake Helly. You and your gang may have to 
extract them, and the job just might begin this afternoon." 


"Christ. Okay, I'll get on it. Anything else?" 

"Can you get hold of any kind of hopper at all?" 

"Cassius has a Tupo he keeps at Toronto Island Airport. Kind of slow and not armed. 
I'm sure he'd—" 

Joanna had come into the kitchen and was listening shamelessly. 

I said, "Get it if you can, but I really need that other stuff. Come as soon as possible. 
We'll sort everything out when you get here." 

"Okay. It'll be damned good to see you again, Helly." 

"Oh, no it won't," I said, and hit the End pad of my phone. 

Joanna was wearing jeans, a metallic gold turtleneck, and a loosely knit white sweater 
with a shawl collar. 

"You didn't show yourself to your friend?" 

"Not everyone thinks the Haluk form is beautiful." 

"All of you isn't," she said, smiling slyly. "Only the essentials." 

"Well, Karl Nazarian is a tough old buzzard, but I still want to reintroduce myself to 
him tactfully. That goes for our other guests as well. I may need your assistance." 

"Oh, my. Then you'd better strengthen my resolve by plying me with a pot of strong 
hot coffee. You do remember how to make it? If not, I'm open to other inducements." 

"Are you, indeed," I murmured. "Let's induce." 

A taxi carrying Beatrice Mangan and Efrem Sontag arrived shortly after seven. As we 
had arranged it, I lurked in the upstairs sitting room while Joanna gave Bea and the 
Delegate coffee, peppermint tea, and muffins with Bonne Maman black cherry preserves. 
After about ten minutes Joanna brought Bea up with her equipment to do the DNA test. 
The astonishment of my former ICS colleague was brief and her interest in my exotic 
body entirely clinical. 

Joanna stood by during the blood-drawing and cursory physical exam. I absolutely 
refused to strip down. 

"Damn," said Bea Mangan. Then she smiled at Joanna. 

I swear Bea knew. How do women do that...? 

Working with her impressive machine on the table in front of the blank holoscreen, 
Bea quickly developed a genetic profile from my biosample, then compared it with the 
one in her ICS files, studying screen after screen of esoteric data. 

"Fascinating! It's you all right, Helly, but overlaid with suppressing sequences from 
your late Haluk demiclone. You're a genetic palimpsest, my man. A human parchment 
with the original writing not quite erased, written over with something terribly new." 

Joanna laughed appreciatively. "What a cogent metaphor." 

"I hate scholarly jokes," I growled, "particularly when I'm the butt. Can a layman 
make sense of this analysis? Will we be able to use it to prove my identity to people like 
Ef Son-tag and Adam Stanislawski, who don't know anything about advanced biology?" 

"Stanislawski?" Bea said. "You have been busy." "He'll be here any minute, and so 
will Karl." "Oh, dear," Joanna said. "I hope they're not hungry. Bea and Ef ate the last of 
the muffins, and there's not much else in the house." 

"Hospitality," I muttered, "is the least of our worries." Bea did something with the 
machine. "Look here, then. We start over. Enter Original Helly's DNA, comme fa. Now 
enter Halukoid Helly's DNA, comme ca. Tap the correlation pad, then hit pr6cis, et voila! 
Go ahead, do it yourself." She walked me through it. At the end the readout said: 


—— 

POSITIVE MATCH PLUS 1623 ANOMALOUS CODING SEQUENCES 
SUBSTITUTED FOR PORTIONS OF NORMALLY NONCODING GENETIC 
MATERIAL. 

DO YOU WISH CODON-BY-CODON BREAKDOWN OF ANOMALIES? Y/N. 

—— 

I told it N. 

"Looks good, Bea. Thank you. Can I keep the machine with me today while I confer 
with some people?" 

"You aren't getting rid of me that easily," she said. "If you hope to use that data to 
convince others of your identity, you'll need a live expert witness to vouch for it. 
Otherwise you might as well be demonstrating a video game. I volunteer my 
unimpeachable authority for as long as you need me. I'll operate the psychotronic device, 
too, if you like." 

"Bea ... there's no way I can say how grateful I am." 

"Then don't," Bea said. "Are we ready for Sontag's show-and-tell?" 

"I'd rather wait until Stanislawski shows up. It'll save time, maybe even reinforce 
plausibility. We won't wait for Karl Nazarian. He has some necessary items to assemble 
and it might take him a while. You and Joanna go down and keep Ef company. Show him 
the test results. I want to sit here and pull some ideas together." 

"Of course," Bea said. 

They left me alone. I'd already been briefed by Joanna on events of the past half year 
as we ate our small breakfast, following the inducements. Seeing holovids of "myself" 
had been bad enough. But I was even more shocked at how quickly the Haluk had moved 
to insinuate themselves into the Commonwealth economy, dismayed at how readily their 
reassurances of goodwill had been accepted, in spite of Ef Sontag's efforts to sound the 
alarm. Not even Brown Fleece's demiclone corpse had significantly swayed public 
opinion against the Haluk. The Concerns had produced experts of their own who 
contradicted Bea's evidence. 

Ef and his committee had done their best. Unfortunately, the fact remained that the 
blue aliens were very good for business, and the Hundred Concerns were fearful of 
rocking the prosperity boat. Their pocket Delegates would vote on the Haluk colonies as 
they were told to, unless I could unleash a groundswell of citizen opposition in time to 
make a difference. 

I began to dictate to a small e-book. Doing my best to remember incriminating 
remarks made by the two Haluk leaders as they stood in front of my dystasis tank. Trying 
to recall details of Barky Tregarth's story, Dolores da Gama's spiteful boasts, and the 
Sheltok skipper's damning admissions of Haluk piracy being swept under the rug by 
nervous Concern management. 

The front doorbell rang. 

I looked out the window, saw a little red Honda Civic parked in front of the town 
house, and assumed that Karl had changed his mind and acquired another set of wheels. 
About ten minutes later Joanna came up to the sitting room. 

"Adam Stanislawski, the richest man in the galaxy, has arrived. Both he and Ef Sontag 
have accepted the proof of your identity. You won't have to submit to the truth machine 
on their behalf. On stage, Blue Boy. The dress rehearsal audience is waiting." 


With her leading, I went down to the kitchen. Ef and Adam and Bea were sitting at the 
table, where cups of coffee and tea shared space with forensic apparatus. 

Gasps at my entrance. The two men sat still as statues. 

"Good morning, all," I said mildly. "Thanks for coming and thanks for believing. I'm 
sure you're curious about the circumstances that resulted in my physical change. In just a 
few minutes I'll satisfy your curiosity and tell the whole story. But first: I hope no one is 
in need of a defibrillator." 

Strained chuckles. 

"No? Excellent. There are two principal objectives I hope to accomplish today, with 
your help. The first is the removal of a demiclone agent, loyal to the Haluk, who has-been 
taking my place as President of Rampart Concern and Corporate Syndic. Adam 
Stanislawski has pledged to help me accomplish this. When this impostor is deposed by 
the Board of Directors, I hope to have Vice-Chairman John Ellington, the Macrodur 
stakeholding representative, elected syndic in his place. He has the stature—and the 
motivation—necessary to pressure Rampart's so-called pocket Delegates into a one-
eighty-degree switch." 

Ef Sontag said, "Are you certain this new syndic will obey orders?" 

Adam Stanislawski laughed. "John will do as I say." 

"And you're certain," Joanna said, "that John is the man you think he is." 

"All of my employees have been required to take DNA tests every week," 
Stanislawski said. "Delegate Sontag's open committee sessions describing demiclone 
infiltration scared the liver out of me. I instituted the policy at the beginning of 
September." The Macrodur chairman's blue eyes did their friendly twinkle thing. "And 
before you ask—I have not excluded myself from the testing. Even though I haven't 
heard Kelly's story about his latest exploits, I've decided to accept his thesis that a vast 
Haluk conspiracy exists, and that it poses an immediate threat to humanity. All of 
Macrodur's, er, political influence will be exerted to defeat the Haluk colonial bill. I'll do 
my best to see that Rampart does the same. You have my word on it." 

The 400-kilo gorilla had spoken. Ef Sontag nodded, showing admirable legislative 
sangfroid. 

I said, "Let's move along. The second objective I hope to accomplish is the one 
Chairman Stanislawski just iterated. To this end I volunteer to appear today as a witness 
in Ef's opposition summation in the Assembly. Prior to my appearance, I'll undergo DNA 
testing and a brief psychotronic interrogation before a conference of the news media. I 
will then invite the man masquerading as Asahel Frost to step forward and do the same 
thing. He won't, of course. By the way, the impostor is a human, not •» Haluk. He's a 
traitor to his race whose behavior can perhaps be explained by the fact that he's a 
dangerous sociopath. His name is Alistair Drummond." 

"Sonuvabitch," said Adam Stanislawski. 

"I have my reasons for unveiling myself to the media prior to my appearance before 
the Assembly," I continued. "It's good psychology to give the Delegates prior warning of 
a bombshell." 

"I agree with the tactic," said Ef Sontag. "We don't want them so shocked by the 
revelation that they don't pay attention to what you're saying." 

"There's another factor favoring media revelation," I continued. "It will warn the 
general population that something dramatic will happen during the Assembly session, and 


ensure that the session receives maximum viewer exposure. Professor Joanna DeVet 
suggested the possibility of an interactive citizen referendum on the colony measure. I 
believe there's constitutional provision for that." 

Sontag didn't look encouraging. "In this situation, I doubt that a majority of the 
Assembly Delegates would yield their voting power to the people. The provision was 
designed to apply to grave emergencies, in situations where Delegate factions appear to 
be hopelessly deadlocked. A vote on new Haluk colonies might not qualify as a grave 
emergency—especially in the minds of my Conservative colleagues." He considered for a 
moment. "However, if the vote goes against us tomorrow, as it very well may, there's 
constitutional provision for an interactive veto if enough citizens express immediate 
disapproval. Am I right, Professor?" 

Joanna nodded. "Delegate Sontag could call for citizen participation from the 
Assembly floor after the Delegate vote is tallied. Unlike the referendum, a citizen veto 
poll doesn't require Assembly approval. It can be okayed by the Speaker herself." 

"She might be amenable," Ef said, "provided sufficient numbers of citizens had 
expressed opposition to the measure following the summations. I'll be sure to mention 
that during our media show." 

"Say it again at the end of your summation," I urged. 

Joanna said, "You realize that a final veto tally would probably take a couple of days, 
while PlaNet hits from remote worlds are collated and verified." She looked bemused. 
"You know, there hasn't been a citizen veto for sixty years. Not since legislation on the 
death penalty for all Throwaways was shot down." 

And if the citizens hadn't gotten off their apathetic duffs and killed that draconian 
measure, Yours Truly would not be alive today, and in a position to make trouble ... 

"Are there any other questions or comments concerning upcoming events at the 
Assembly this afternoon?" I inquired. 

"Do you really think it's wise to expose Alistair Drummond during a media 
conference?" Bea Mangan queried the room at large. "I'm a medical doctor as well as a 
geneticist and I did study psychiatry—although I admit mine is very rusty by now. But it 
seems to me that there's a danger of provoking this man to some very rash actions. He 
might even try to disrupt the media conference. Perhaps Assembly Security ought to be 
warned of that possibility." 

I said, "Good point. But I think it's necessary that Drummond's credibility be 
destroyed immediately. I believe he's inserted demiclone agents into other Concerns 
besides Rampart." 

"I agree," said Stanislawski, "but with one stipulation. Expose the fraudulent Helly, 
but don't name Drummond." He frowned. "There's bound to be confusion about why 
Helly looks like a Haluk, when his demiclone is a human being. I know I'm confused." 

"I hope I can let that slide for today," I said. "There were two duplicates made of me. 
The first was Drummond and the second was a Haluk. I killed the Haluk demiclone in 
cold blood, while he was unconscious. It was necessary, but I don't intend to defend my 
action in a quickie media conference." 

Everybody stared at me in silence for a long beat. 

Then Ef Sontag cleared his throat tactfully. "The regular media room in 
Commonwealth Assembly House is probably too small for this affair. When we 
announce the purpose of the conference, every person in the capital with media 


credentials will want to attend. We might have a mob scene on our hands, even without 
interference from Drummond. I'm not sure that my staff will be able to cope." 

"Suppose I have my own media-relations people liaise with them," said the Macrodur 
chairman. "You and I can discuss the matter after Helly tells us about his recent 
activities." He turned to me. "I'm very interested to know how you ended up blue. 
Lamentable as the condition is for you, personally, I'm inclined to believe it might be 
extremely advantageous to our cause. A humanoid Haluk corpse wasn't dramatic enough 
to shock people. A live Halukoid human is something else." 

I stretched my alien lips into a smile facsimile. "My tale is next on the docket. But 
first, sir, you need to get on the horn and tell John Ellington to organize the emergency 
Rampart board meeting. Let's make it 1100 hours at Rampart Tower. And please caution 
your stooge very strongly to keep news of the gathering away from Fake Helly Frost. 
Otherwise, we might arrive at Rampart Tower and discover that all of the directors except 
the demiclone have disappeared." 

"Leave it to me," said the 400-kilo gorilla. He took a phone from the inside pocket of 
his suit coat and began tapping pads. 

During the hiatus, the back doorbell rang and Joanna went to answer it. She returned 
in a moment followed by a rugged elderly man wearing a white coverall labeled C'EST 
CHEESE CATERING SERVICE. The logo of a comical mouse in a chef's toque was 
embroidered on his back. 

Karl Nazarian spotted me, did the predictable double take and said, "Aw, shit! Aw, 
shit! Is that you, Helly?" 

"Yes." 

"Shit," he said for a third time. He stood there for a moment with his face screwed into 
an expression of thunderous fury. Then he put down the sizable container and the 
garment bag he was carrying, came to the table, pulled me to my feet, and embraced me 
in a bear hug. "We'll get those Haluk bastards for this!" 

"Yes," said Bea Mangan quietly. "We will." 

I introduced Karl to the group. "I was just about to regale these good people with the 
adventures of Helly the Haluk. Now you can hear the story, too. What's in the box? 
Weapons?" 

"They're outside in the van. This is something better." He opened the large container 
and began unloading it onto the table. "My girlfriend the caterer thought I might as well 
bring some of her great home cooking. Quiche, anyone? Six different kinds. Also pigs-in-
a-blanket, croissants, brioches, walnut bread—" 

"One of everything for me," I said. "I have a feeling I'll need to keep up my strength 
today." 

—— 

By the time I'd finished telling my story and answering questions, it was nearly ten 
o'clock. We'd eaten all the food Karl had brought. Periodically, my narrative was 
interrupted by phone calls, some directed to members of the spellbound audience, some 
made by the audience themselves. 

Sontag heard from his media liaison people. Superefficient Macrodur flacks were 
already demanding a lightning policy briefing in anticipation of the big show. Ef passed 
on information and gave orders. 

John Ellington called back, informing his boss that he had organized the emergency 


Rampart board meeting. Eight of the twelve directors were in Toronto, constituting the 
necessary quorum. I would do my presentation before Gunter Eckert, my sister Eve, my 
father Simon, John Ellington, Chief Finance Officer Caleb Millstone, Chief Technical 
Officer Crista Wenzel, Small Stakeholder Representative Thora Scranton, and Chief 
Legal Officer Satoshi "Sam" Yamamoto. 

According to Ellington, no one at Rampart Tower knew the whereabouts of the 
alleged Asahel Frost. He had not been seen in his offices for three days. 

Prompted by my account of the Haluk leaders viewing me in the tank and discussing 
the Grand Design, Bea Mangan deduced—correctly—that Alistair Drummond was not a 
virtually perfect genetic replica of me as Fake Helly Mark II had been. Since Drummond 
had been in dystasis for only four weeks, he would retain substantial amounts of his own 
DNA. Bea downloaded Drummond's stats from her lab at ICS. At her suggestion, Adam 
ordered Macrodur sleuths to begin searching for a verifiable biosample of the impostor— 
as well as for Drummond himself. 

When I described the pirate attack on Captain Schmidt's vessel, and mentioned that the 
demiclone Dolores da Gama had let slip the name of the Haluk base in Sagittarius, both 
Sontag and Stanislawski went into action. 

The Delegate told his staff to subpoena the Sheltok Chief Operations Officer as a 
hostile witness during today's Assembly presentation. Ef planned to use the report on the 
incident that I'd sent to Karl; but even though that report was certified, it remained 
hearsay unless an independent source corroborated it. If the Sheltok COO did that, we'd 
have admissible evidence of Haluk hostility. 

I concluded my recital by describing my trip through the Dark Path of Toronto, 
together with an expurgated version of my reunion with Joanna, who smiled 
enigmatically. The others seated at the table burst into ironic applause at the end. 

Adam Stanislawski said, "I never heard such a crazy yarn in my life. I believe every 
word of it." 

I said, "Thank you, sir." 

He said, "Call me Adam. What do you say we adjourn now, and let Helly get on with 
raising a shitstorm in the Rampart boardroom?" 

"I'm coming with you," Joanna said to me. "To the tower and to the Assembly. And 
don't you give me that old-fashioned look, Citizen Stanislawski." 

"Adam," he repeated, grinning. 

"But Joanna—" I protested. 

"Any political scientist would sell her soul to be present at these two events," she said. 
"Don't you understand that there's another book in this? Besides, I'll make a splendid 
character witness for Helly." She thought for a moment. 

"Perhaps I'd better change into something more media-appropriate." 

"Beat you to it," said Bea Mangan, rising from the table and showing off her 
handsome black suit. "And I'm going to Rampart Tower, too." 


Joanna left us, and Bea began tinkering with her genetic assay equipment. 

"Speaking of clothes," Karl Nazarian said, picking up the garment bag he'd brought 
and handing it to me, "here's the body armor and the Anonyme and the footgear you 
asked for. The new phone, too. But what in the world are you planning to do with the 
Joru costume?" 

"Wear it into Assembly House later for the media conference," I said. "They wouldn't 
let me inside, wearing an Anonyme privacy screen. So I'll step into the galactic spotlight 
dressed as a shy, friendly alien; all muffled up. Whet the crowd's curiosity: Who he? 
Wasn't this conference supposed to be about Haluk? Then Ef gives the signal, I whip off 
the Joru cloak and hood—" 

"Eek," said Bea. 

"And take your place in show-biz history," Sontag said wryly. "I have to get back to 
my office. There are things that need doing, especially if we're to include that Sheltok 
piracy evidence in the presentation. The media conference is scheduled for 1315 hours in 
the rotunda, during the lunch recess. We'll be expected in the Assembly chamber exactly 
forty-five minutes later when the session resumes. Helly, you and Bea better not let me 
down—or I won't just have egg on my face, I'll have dinosaur doo." 

"I'll get him to the church on time," Karl promised. "I have the catering van to drive 
him and Joanna and Bea from here to Rampart Tower. After the board meeting, one of 
my associates will be waiting in a hopper at the tower skyport for the trip to the 
Assembly." 

"Cassius in his Tupo?" I asked Karl. 

"He's rounding up the Over-the-Hill Gang even as we speak. They'll be ready if you 
need them." 

"You seem very well organized, Citizen Nazarian," Adam said. 

Karl shrugged. "I was VP for Spooky Projects at Rampart until Alistair Drummond 
fired my ass. Helly says I may be rehired fairly soon." 

"I hope your van has room for one more passenger. I intend to go along to Rampart 
myself to keep an eye on the proceedings." The genial glint in Adam Stanislawski's eyes 
turned into something ice-cold. "And perhaps encourage a suitable outcome to the 
meeting." He passed out cards. "Here's my personal code, if any of you need to get in 
touch with me at any time." 

I said, "You'd all better make a note of my new code, too. If you call the old one, 
you'll be talking to Alistair Drummond!" 

Assorted humorous exclamations ensued. They really weren't all that funny to me. 

Ef Sontag looked at his wrist chronometer. "I better call me a cab, then." 

Adam offered a car key. "Take my little red Honda. It's parked out front. When you 
finish with it, just tell it to go home. Don't be deceived by its modest appearance. It's fully 
shielded and equipped with enough gadgetry to tempt the ghost of James Bond." 

"Can it make a vente triple-shot no-foam latte?" 

"In a New York minute." 

Ef took the key, kissed it, and headed for the front door. 

Karl Nazarian cocked his head in sudden bright-idea mode. "Chairman, I wonder if I 
could ask a favor. After today's Assembly session ends, Helly will need to get out of 
town quickly to avoid the media and ... certain other people. Our friend Cassius Potter 
has offered his own private aircraft, but it's rather slow. And unarmed." 


I saw what Karl was driving at. "My safe house is some distance away. Using a 
Rampart hopper isn't an option because of security considerations. If you have one I 
could borrow—" 

Stanislawski poked a code into one of his cards with a cheap plastic stylus and handed 
it to me. "Go to the Assembly House skyport when you're ready to leave and give this to 
the dispatcher." 

"Thanks very much." 

"Would you like to tell me where you'll be staying?" 

"Let's wait till I get there. I may have to change my plans." 

Karl said, "Go get dressed, Helly. It's time to put this show on the road." 

Adam smiled at Bea Mangan. "Why don't I help carry your equipment to the van, 
Chief Superintendent?" 

"Not until I've done a DNA tesf'bf you and Karl." Both men stared at her, nonplussed. 
"We can't afford to take chances with anyone, can we?" she inquired reasonably. 

I went upstairs to find Joanna, hoping there might be time for one last little 
inducement before the battle. 


Chapter 9 

 

Adam phoned John Ellington again as we drove south to the waterfront and the newly 
rechristened Rampart Tower, ordering his long-suffering minion to notify the Internal 
Security officers at the VIP skyway portal of our imminent arrival. In an unlikely vehicle. 

I had to hand it to the Rampart guards. They didn't blink an eye as a catering van badly 
in need of a wash job stopped inside the elegant portico on the 300th floor, where only 
executive limos and other prestigious rolling stock usually dared venture. One man 
opened the passenger door for me, while the other helped Joanna, Bea, and Adam alight 
from the rear. The guards courteously took charge of Bea's equipment, which was to be 
sent directly to the boardroom. 

By then John Ellington himself had arrived to escort us to our rendezvous with 
corporate destiny. The vice chairman was a stocky black man dressed in a gorgeous 
three-piece Italian silk suit the color of aged bourbon, a green-striped scarf, and a golden 
brooch shaped like an African mask. The mask had tiny emerald eyes. 

Stanislawski introduced Joanna and Bea by their formal titles, but pointedly left me 
incognito. 

I said, "Vice Chairman, do you have the skyport access authorization code for Citizen 
Nazarian and the group that will arrive later by air?" Ellington shot me a nervous look. 
The privacy visor of the Anonyme hood has that effect on some people. Then he nodded. 

"Give it to me, please." 

I passed the card to Karl through the van's window and whispered, "Catch you soon, I 
hope!" We had already discussed contingency plans as we made our way through surface 
traffic to the tower. Karl gave me a little sardonic salute, then drove away into the down-
ramp. 

"Perhaps you'd like to leave your things in the visitors' cloakroom and freshen up 
before the meeting," Ellington said. He led us into a spacious lobby that contained 
enough potted tropical greenery to qualify as an annex of the Allan Gardens Palm House. 
A woman wearing the uniform of an InSec captain approached our group, looking grave, 
and addressed the vice chairman. 

"I'm sorry, sir. But this ... entity is armed." She nodded at me. "He will not be 
permitted tot, go further unless he relinquishes his weapon." ' 

I carefully removed the small Ivanov Squire from the pocket of my dark gray anorak 
and held it out in harmless display. My Halukoid hands were concealed by dark gray 
matching mittens. "I prefer to keep the weapon." 

"And he is wearing body armor," the captain pointed out. We'd all been scanned as we 
came in the door. 

"Thank you," Adam Stanislawski said. "The gentleman will keep his gun and armor. 
That will be all." 

The captain started to object, but Ellington made a curt gesture and she retreated to her 
desk. Adam and the two women went to doff their outerwear. The vice chairman was left 
standing with me. 

"Looks like we're in for a change in the weather," I said. 

"Are you speaking literally," John Ellington inquired in a snide voice, "or 
figuratively?" 

A smartass. I wished I had managed to overhear more of Adam's conversation with 


him when they spoke on the phone earlier. How much did he already know? 

"Are the Rampart directors present and accounted for?" I asked. 

"Eight of us are here, including Chairman Eckert. As I told Adam, we have a quorum." 
He had moderated his tone to almost courteous. After all, I was here under the auspices of 
the gorilla. 

I said, "I understand that Asahel Frost will not be joining us. Was he notified of the 
meeting?" A little double-checking never hurts. 

"Following Adam's explicit instructions, I didn't invite him." 

"Good. Tell the security captain, there, to alert all InSec posts in the tower. If Asahel 
Frost shows up, you are to be informed instantly. Then you'll inform me even faster." 

He stared in frustration at my privacy visor, lips tightly compressed, before speaking 
very softly. "What the hell's going on here? Some kind of a palace coup?" 

"Talk to the captain, John, and don't get uppity." 

His dark eyes widened in outraged dignity. "Who are you?" 

When I remained silent, he shook his head, went to the security desk, and did as I'd 
told him. A few minutes later the others joined us and we entered a very large, very 
elegant lift that had its very own potted palm. After Ellington plugged his card, we were 
whisked up another hundred stories to the top of what had once been Galapharma Tower, 
the most distinctive edifice on the capital skyline and the only one that had earned an 
obscene nickname. 

Alistair Drummond's little joke. The same nickname had been applied to him. 

I was gratified to see that the redoubtable Mevanery Morgan, executive assistant 
extraordinary, was still guardian of the corporate inner sanctum. She had relocated from 
the Seriphos office when Rampart attained Concern status. Morgan was not wearing her 
Gorgon Medusa pin today, but the dour, suspicious expression on her face made up for it. 

Her new computer desk was even more awesomely equipped than the old one, situated 
at the center of the anteroom like the tuffet of a controlling spider. Crimson carpeting 
with dramatic ocher spokes surrounded the desk. The room's wall panels were satin-finish 
golden metal alternating with dark rosewood. There were no potted palms. The sleek 
Braque sculpture, Simon's pride, that had graced the former Rampart executive reception 
area hadn't made the transition to the new digs; it had been supplanted by a tortured 
assemblage of ruby glass tubing that looked like the large intestine of some unfortunate 
marine mammal, internally illuminated by glowing ordure. I wondered if Rampart's new 
president had chosen it years ago to adorn Galapharma Tower ... 

Mevanery Morgan greeted us solemnly and led us to the boardroom door, one of four 
that opened into the anteroom. None of the doors had anything so plebeian as an 
identifying sign. We trooped inside, ladies first. John Ellington went to his place near the 
head of the long table, at the right hand of Chairman Gunter Eckert. Adam Stanislawski 
sat down at the table's foot without asking anyone's permission. Morgan showed us lesser 
mortals to chairs on either side of Adam and then went out, closing the door. 

I noticed that Bea Mangan's genetic assay device and the small Hogan truth machine 
had arrived ahead of us. They rested on a stand beside the door. 

The wall behind Gunter Eckert's chair had tall narrow windows that overlooked the 
leaden, island-scattered waters of Lake Ontario. Beyond the southern edge of the force-
field umbrella was a fuzzy blur that might have been either mist or falling snow. 

Eve and Simon stood near a refreshment bar at the far side of the room, talking quietly 


together, their backs to the rest of us. Caleb Millstone, the prissy CFO, Crista Wenzel, the 
Chief Technical Officer, and Thora Scranton, who had represented Rampart's small 
stakeholders for over two decades, sat at the boardroom table just below John Ellington, 
staring at me. Three chairs on Gunter's left were empty. The fourth was occupied by Sam 
Yamamoto, my friend and colleague in Rampart's legal department, who had been my 
principal associate during the Galapharma trial. I was glad Sam had been promoted into 
the Chief Legal Officer slot, wondered what he was studying so intently on the recessed 
computer display in front of him. 

Gunter Eckert said, "Ladies and gentlemen, I'd like to call this meeting to order." 

Eve and Simon came to the table and sat down in the chairs at Gunter's left, leaving an 
empty seat between them—presumably in case President Asahel Frost showed up after 
all. My sister did not condescend to notice those of us at the foot of the table. She had 
always been a clotheshorse, but today she was so perfectly groomed— striking in an 
ivory sheath and large sapphire earrings, every hair in her coiffure lacquered firmly in 
place—that she might have been an android mannequin. A rather short one, with an 
attitude. 

Simon was a shocking contrast. Seven months had worked a terrible change on my 
father. He had become skeletally thin, his signature denim ranchman's outfit appeared 
many sizes too large for him, and his tooled leather belt had been ratcheted to the last 
hole. Sunken rheumy eyes darted restlessly from one person to another until they found 
my incongruous figure and turned slitty with apprehension. 

I thought: What in God's name have they done to you, Pop? 

But I knew the answer. No doubt Simon had refused to retire, and couldn't be forced 
off the Board of Directors, so Drummond and his crew had dealt with him as they had 
Karl Nazarian. Unless I intervened, the malignant virus was going to live in my father 
until he died. 

Gunter Eckert called the group to order, dispensed with the reading of the minutes, 
and invited John Ellington to present the first order of business. 

"Before I do that, let me introduce our guests," Ellington said. "You all know Adam 
Stanislawski, Chairman and CEO of Macrodur Concern. He requested this extraordinary 
meeting today. On Adam's left are Joanna DeVet, a distinguished author and professor of 
political science at Commonwealth University, and Chief Superintendent Beatrice 
Mangan of the Interstellar Commerce Secretariat's Forensic Division. The man seated at 
Adam's right has not been presented to me. Perhaps Chairman Stanislawski will do the 
honors." 

Adam said, "The Chief Superintendent, Professor DeVet, and I are agreed on his 
identity. Those gadgets over there on the cart will verify it as well." He took me by the 
arm and rose to his feet, drawing me with him. "This man is the real Asahel Frost." 

Murmurs of astonishment and indignant disbelief. 

"No," Eve said. Her face had turned the color of ash. 

Adam plowed on. "The person who has used Kelly's name for the past six months is 
an impostor. A genetically engineered demiclone of the type described by Delegate 
Efrem Sontag in his committee hearings. This afternoon Delegate Sontag will present 
evidence of Kelly's identity to the news media and to the Commonwealth Assembly." 

"No!" Eve said again in a more emphatic tone. "That's impossible!" 

Several of the others loudly voiced their agreement with her opinion. But Sam 


Yamamoto was smiling at me, and one of his eyes slowly closed in an unmistakable 
wink. 

Gunter Eckert bellowed, "Adam, have you lost your bloody mind?" 

Stanislawski turned to Joanna and Bea with an ironic smile. "Ladies? Have I?" 

Bea said, "I tested this individual's DNA. He has been subjected to a genen procedure 
and his appearance has been altered. But he's Asahel Frost, beyond a doubt." 

Joanna rose from her chair and stood beside me, one hand resting on my shoulder. "I 
know him better than any person here. Better than Eve, better than Simon. This man is 
my husband." 

I felt my chest constrict in sudden breathless joy, wanted to leap and shout and stomp 
and tell the Rampart board that I didn't give a hoot in hell what they thought—what the 
whole goddamned galaxy thought!—so long as she accepted me. 

All the same, I didn't say a word, didn't move a muscle. 

Eve regarded the lot of us with cool contempt. "I don't know what you're playing at, 
Adam, how you've managed to dupe these two women and Delegate Sontag, or 
brainwash them—" 

"Let him prove himself," Thora Scranton demanded. "Use the truth machine." 

"Machines can be rigged," said Gunter Eckert. 

Bea Mangan said, "Then bring in your own psychotronic device and your own 
interrogator. Call the ICS and request another DNA examiner with another assay 
machine. This man will pass any identity test you can give him. He is the real Asahel 
Frost." 

"No," Eve insisted. Her eyes were burning in her pale face and both hands were 
clenched into fists. "No impostor could have done the things my brother Asa did. He 
accomplished far more than the Rampart-Galapharma consolidation. He made himself 
my good right arm! He's kind and affirming and strong. He's never tried to undermine my 
authority. Thanks to him, Rampart has become a respected member of the Big Seven." 

"Thanks to him," I said, finally speaking up in my altered voice, "trade with the Haluk 
is the bulwark of Rampart's prosperity. But it won't last, Evie. The aliens will take it all 
away. The impostor has inserted Haluk demiclones into Rampart corporate 
management." 

"The Faceless One speaks!" drawled Crista Wenzel. 

"And you'd better listen," Adam Stanislawski said. 

Eve cried out, "This is ridiculous! Everyone in the Concern has been DNA-tested 
regularly since the Sontag committee started its flap in August. Including me. Including 
Asa." 

"Who did the testing?" I demanded. "Rampart Internal Security?" 

"Of course." 

"Evie—" 

"Don't call me that!" she shouted. 

I said, "Madam Chief Executive Officer, if the Rampart president is a demiclone, don't 
you think InSec would be the first part of the Concern he'd subvert? ... Have you 
forgotten our turncoat pal Ollie Schneider so soon? I know how devastating this 
revelation is. How shocking. Joanna showed me holovids of the impersonator inaction. 
He's utterly convincing. A corporate team player—exactly the kind of man you and 
Simon hoped and prayed I'd turn into after the big trial, ready to fulfill the family 'hopes 


that I'd dashed over and over again in the past. But you know in your heart that the real 
Asahel Frost could never have become that man." 

"I know nothing of the sort!" she said, but the conviction that had been so rock-solid 
before might have been faltering. 

With the exception of Sam Yamamoto, who was whispering into the stylomike of his 
computer, the other directors were listening to Eve's and my exchange with expressions 
that ranged from blank puzzlement to sick uncertainty. 

I asked her, "Would you be willing to have independent experts assay the DNA of 
every top Rampart executive? Including that of your so-called brother Asa?" 

She lifted her chin and smiled coldly at me. "Of course. I'll authorize it personally—
after the Haluk colony bill passes." 

"The hell you will!" Adam Stanislawski exclaimed furiously. 

"Don't try to bully me, Chairman," Eve snapped. "Rampart is my corporation, not 
yours, and I won't see its best interests compromised. If my decision doesn't please you, 
put your stake on the block and we'll buy you out." 

Sadly, I said, "Oh, Evie. Are you willing to set aside all your past suspicions about the 
Haluk, all their treachery and the personal suffering you endured at their hands? Never 
mind that the Commonwealth of Human Worlds might also be in deadly danger—" 

"There is no plausible evidence of a Haluk threat to humanity," she stated. Her voice 
was flat, almost without inflection. "The true Asahel Frost has proved that to our 
satisfaction." 

"Under psychotronic interrogation?" 

"Don't be idiotic." 

Simon suddenly said, "Who is he?" 

Everyone looked at my father, who pointed a trembling finger at me and spoke in an 
agonized rasp. "If you're Asa, then who's this crafty sidewinder who's taken us all in, 
played us for fools?" 

"He's Alistair Drummond," I said. 

Eve cried, "That's a lie!" The other directors seemed petrified. 

Simon's gaunt face twisted with some devastating emotion. "Turn off your privacy 
visor, you! Right this fuckin' minute! I'll know if you're really my son!" 

"Maybe not, Pop," I said. "The Haluk have worked me over in a dystasis tank." And to 
my sister: "Same as they did to you, Eve, once upon a time on the planet Cravat." 

"Quit shilly-shallying, dammit!" Simon said. "Show us your face!" 

"All right." I pulled off my constricting mittens and flicked the switch of the visor. 

Pandemonium. 

As the room erupted, I removed the anorak and handed it to Joanna, who still stood 
beside me, and whispered a few words to her. 

She said, "Are you sure?" 

"Watch him. Go over to the refreshment bar. I don't think there's any immediate 
danger, but don't take your eyes off him for a minute. I won't be in a position to do 
anything during the tests. I'll have to depend on you. Can you manage?" 

She folded the Anonyme and held it tightly against her. "Yes." 

Adam Stanislawski endured the uproar for only a few minutes before shouting, "That's 
enough!" 

In the ensuing silence, Gunter Eckert said, "Chief Superintendent Mangan. Please use 


your machine to test this— this man's DNA." 

Bea said, "Very well." She moved the equipment cart next to my chair and set to work. 

Joanna was helping herself to coffee. Simon sat slumped in his chair, eyes closed, lips 
mumbling silently. Eve's expression was stubborn and aloof. Adam Stanislawski 
wandered up to the head of the table and spoke in an undertone to Gunter Eckert and 
John Ellington. Millstone, Scranton, and Sam Yamamoto waited with expectant faces. 
Crista Wenzel, the Chief Technical Officer, left her seat and took up a position where she 
could observe the DNA analyzer's display. 

After a few minutes the machine confirmed my identity. 

Wenzel said to me, "Now I'd like to use the psychotronic device to interrogate you 
briefly, if you please." She smiled minimally. "Or if you don't please." 

I submitted to the hookup. When the truth machine activated, I felt an unpleasant 
sensation, as though an entire hive of nanobot bees had invaded my cranium. Wenzel 
asked only one question. 

"Are you Asahel Frost?" 

I said, "Yes, I am." 

Zap. Momentary blankout. Pain. 

Wenzel watched as Bea touched several control pads. The CTO studied the display, 
nodded, and addressed the board. "This machine also confirms his identity. In my opinion 
we have no choice but to tentatively accept these test results, pending confirmation by an 
independent examining team. I so move, and call for a second." 

"I second the motion of the CTO," said John Ellington. 

Gunter Eckert said, "Those in favor, please raise your hands." 

Ellington, Crista Wenzel, Thora Scranton. 

"Those opposed." 

Eve, Caleb Millstone, and—shit!—Sam Yamamoto. 

I looked at him. He shrugged. 

Gunter said, "Simon? Are you abstaining?" 

The old man had tears streaming down his face. He said to me, "It'll destroy Rampart, 
you know. After everything we went through. The other Concerns will wipe us off the 
map for screwing up the Haluk trade." 

"We're going to face some tough times, Pop," I said. "All of us, not only Rampart. The 
greed and stupidity of the Hundred Concerns have put humanity at terrible risk. I'm going 
to the media this afternoon to talk about it, and then I'll repeat my allegations before the 
Assembly. Whatever this Board of Directors decides, I don't intend to let Alistair 
Drummond and the Haluk win." 

Simon's green eyes blazed at me with some of their old fire. "You gonna stick with us, 
then, afterward?" 

I hesitated, knowing what he was asking. Sighed. "Yes, you blackmailing old coot. If I 
survive this rucking mess." 

"I vote aye," Simon said. 

Eve shook her head. "Oh, Pop. What have you done?" 

"What I had to do," he said to her coolly. "What's more, you know it, missy! 
Rampart's not your child any more'n it's mine. And don't you forget it." 

The virus hadn't sapped my father's old feistiness, or his common sense, either. 

Gunter Eckert touched the computer display on the table in front of him. "In the 


absence of our Corporate Secretary, I herewith record that the motion has carried." His 
eyes swept the group. "We now face a peculiar situation. Our election of the erstwhile 
Asahel Frost to the positions of president and syndic is nullified—" 

"No, it's not," I said. "You elected Asahel Frost. I'm Asahel Frost. I hold the offices 
and I still have a seat on this board, by virtue of my quarterstake." Thus giving notice that 
any attempt to vote me out would fail for lack of the required stakeholder votes, I spoke 
to Yamamoto. "Do you agree with my position, Mr. Chief Legal Officer?" 

"In my opinion, you're correct." Sam spoke blandly. "Although I doubt there's any 
precedent to support you." 

"You can't do this!" Eve exclaimed. "You have no right!" 

I ignored her, wondering how Alistair Drummond had managed to turn this intelligent, 
decisive woman into a deluded fool. Perhaps Simon was right about her thinking of the 
Concern as a person with a life of its own. Legally, of course, it was—but not 
morally/Trust a lawyer to make the distinction. 

"As Rampart president," I said, "I exercise my right to relinquish the office of syndic, 
and appoint John Ellington to fill the vacancy. Do you accept, John?" 

Almost inaudibly: "Yes." 

"I instruct you to immediately contact those Delegates of the Commonwealth 
Assembly who represent our planets. You will urge them to vote against the upcoming 
measure granting the Haluk three hundred new Perseus colonies. If your persuasions fail, 
you may expect the gravest possible consequences." 

"I understand." He threw a bitter glance at Adam Stanislawski. "I have every 
confidence that the Delegates will respond appropriately." 

A silence. 

"Is there any other new business?" Gunter Eckert asked formally. 

Simon let out a cackle of laughter that hovered on the edge of hysteria. "The hell with 
business. Let's all get on over to the Assembly chamber and watch the friggin' 
fireworks!" 

"It's my intention," I declared, "to request that ICS, CCID, and ECID teams 
immediately begin genetic profile comparison tests of every person in top-echelon 
management and every member of the Rampart security force. Eventually, each Rampart 
employee will be tested. In Toronto this action will be supervised by Chairman Gunter 
Eckert, as soon as his identity is verified by Chief Superintendent Mangan, and by Karl 
Nazarian, who has already been tested by her. Karl will resume his former position as 
Vice President for Special Projects at once, appointed by me. In our Seriphos outplanet 
headquarters, I will request that CCID personnel immediately test Zared Frost, Rampart 
Chief Perseus Operations Officer, and Matilde Gregoire, Vice President for Perseus 
Security. They will then supervise testing of Rampart executives in that region. In our 
Hygeia headquarters similar testing will be under the supervision of Orion COO Edison 
Vivieros and Orion Security VP Reinhard Fournier. Does any member of the board wish 
to move an objection?" 

No one spoke. Eve was staring at her clasped hands. 

I said, "Then I move this board meeting be adjourned." 

"Second," said Thora Scranton. "Helly, are you giving out freebie tix to your media 
circus over at the Assembly?" 

Good old Thora; we'd always been buddies. I showed my inhuman grin. "Anyone 


interested can join the party... after Bea Mangan tests their DNA." 

"Except John," said Adam Stanislawski, "who has other business to take care of." 

Ellington had already risen from his seat and started for the door. He said sourly, 
"Stop twisting it, Adam. I told you I'd convince the Delegates." 

"I think not," said Sam Yamamoto. He stood up suddenly at his place, a Kagi pistol in 
his hand. "Come back to the table, John. The rest of you, sit still." 

Thunderstruck, Eve whispered, "Sam?" 

Adam Stanislawski said, "Oh, shit." 

"Is Alistair Drummond on his way, Sam?" I inquired archly. "Or did you just send out 
a general mole-call on your computer?" 

"Guess." 

"He's a demiclone," I said. 

"Shut up!" Fake Sam shouted. He fired at me twice. The blue beams hit me square in 
the chest. The people at the table cried out in horror as I fell from my chair and landed in 
a heap on the floor, praying Sam wouldn't try a head shot. A sharp smell of ozone and 
burnt fabric filled the air. 

I heard starchy Caleb Millstone call Sam an unexpectedly filthy name. Lying on my 
right side, I had a perfect view of the demiclone as he pulled Simon to his feet, pressing 
the muzzle of the photon gun into the old man's temple. "Everyone sit down and keep 
quiet! My people will be here in a few minutes and we'll sort everything out." 

Eve said, "Oh, Asa ..." 

I couldn't see her face, but the changed timbre of her voice told me that she had finally 
accepted the truth. I hoped that it wasn't too late to matter. 

John Ellington addressed the impostor. "Do you seriously think Mevanery Morgan is 
going to allow unauthorized persons access to the executive elevator?" 

Fake Sam smiled. "She will, if the alternative is watching Simon Frost's brain go 
extra-crispy." He swiveled his captive around toward Gunter Eckert. "Call her in here, 
Chairman." 

I wasn't hurt, of course. My body armor had saved me. I waited for an opportunity to 
make a move without endangering my father. 

Eckert was hesitating, and it made the demi nervous. "Do it now, Gunter! Do it, damn 
you!" 

He brandished the Kagi for emphasis, and it shifted momentarily away from Simon's 
head and pointed harmlessly at the boardroom wall behind Eckert. I braced one arm and 
leg and hurled myself crabwise at the legs of the two men— —at the same time that 
Joanna, still standing behind Fake Sam at the refreshment bar, shot him in the back with 
the Ivanov I'd left in my anorak pocket. 

—— 

I phoned Karl Nazarian, who was waiting with his gang at the Rampart Tower 
skyport, and asked for his suggestions on what we should do next. Our contingency plans 
hadn't included a demiclone on the Board of Directors who would tip off his alien 
confederates inside the building. 

Karl told us to call the cops. 

CCID was clearly flabbergasted at receiving a request for armed assistance from an 
Amalgamated Concern—big businesses always cleaned up their own messes—but 
Gunter Eckert's authority was not to be denied. Inside of twenty minutes Rampart Tower 


was sealed and swarming with Criminal Investigation personnel corraling Rampart 
executives and security employees. Half an hour after that, forensic teams from ICS and 
half a dozen other government agencies were administering DNA tests. 

Only a handful of InSec demis offered armed resistance. Even fewer managed to 
escape. All of the executives submitted meekly to the testing. 

Karl and his crew came from the skyport to the boardroom for instructions shortly 
after CCID arrived. By the time he reached us, Bea Mangan had already checked the 
DNA of Gunter Eckert and the other members of the board, as well as that of Morgan the 
Gorgon, who was vastly indignant that we should think a Haluk capable of impersonating 
her. Everyone was legitimate except snoozing Sam. 

I gave Karl custody of the unconscious demiclone, then arranged for a CCID SWAT 
team to accompany him and his associates to Rampart InSec's psychotronic lab. Karl had 
orders to commandeer the place and interrogate anyone in the building whose DNA 
wasn't up to human snuff. I promised to check with him after the second act of the day's 
melodrama played out at Assembly House. 

A felony theft-of-identity warrant was issued for the arrest of a human John Doe 
having the spurious iris-ID of Asa-hel Frost. Among other places, the APB was 
transmitted to every starport on Earth. I hoped we weren't locking the barn door after the 
horse had escaped. One of the messages sent by Fake Sam had gone to my old personal 
code, so Alistair Drummond knew we were hot on his trail. 

As we prepared to leave, Adam Stanislawski declared he'd had enough up-close-and-
personal excitement for one day. He intended to watch the rest of the fun and games from 
the safety of his own private suite in Macrodur Tower. Cassius Potter dropped him off 
there beforeflying Bea, Joanna, and me to the media conference. 

—— 

It took place pretty much as Ef Sontag and I had scripted it. 

We appeared side by side, I in my concealing Joru robes, at a podium on a small 
improvised dais at the very center of the rotunda that fronted the Assembly chamber 
proper. Bea Mangan, her trusty equipment, and Joanna were poised just behind us, 
awaiting their cues. Experienced Macrodur flacks helped Ef's PR staff orchestrate the 
technicalities. 

There must have been close to six hundred reporters crowded into the glass-domed 
circular foyer, all festooned with the tools of their trade. Huge holovid monitors had been 
set up in adjacent areas to accommodate the nonmedia audience, who numbered in the 
thousands. Displays in the Assembly dining rooms also showed the news conference live, 
at the request of interested Delegates. 

I hoped the Servant of Servants of Luk and his entourage were paying close attention, 
too. A member of Ef's committee had reported that the Haluk were already in the 
building. 

After Sontag greeted the journalists and made brief introductory remarks, I flung off 
my concealing black-and-white robes to dramatic effect, standing on the dais naked to the 
waist while the cameras went crazy. Ef told the crowd who I was, why I looked like a 
Haluk, and what I was going to talk about today inside the Assembly chamber. 

Then Bea tested my genes and not only proved that I was Asahel Frost, but also 
demonstrated that I had been subjected to illegal demiclone therapy—presumably by the 
same entities whose superficial appearance I now wore. In a touching character-witness 


testimonial, Joanna declared once again that I was certainly her former husband, a man 
unjustly convicted of crimes and deprived of citizenship, whom she had never ceased to 
respect. 

Connected to the Hogan truth machine and interrogated by Sontag, I told the citizens 
of the Confederation of Human Worlds how I had been kidnapped by the Haluk and 
cloned. I described how my Evil Twin had taken my place at Rampart so as to gain 
control of the genen vector PD32:C2, and how he had used my name and reputation to 
promote the Haluk cause. I disavowed the lies that had cast doubt on the evidence 
presented by Sontag's committee. I dared the impostor wearing my face to come before 
the media and get tested as I had been. 

I did not identify the Fake Helly demiclone as Alistair Drummond. 

The galaxy-wide audience heard a heavily edited version of the Rampart Board of 
Directors meeting and my reclamation of the office of Rampart president. Racked with 
pain from the continuing zaps of the nasty little Hogan machine, which verified my every 
statement, I described the measures being taken at that very moment to flush demiclone 
agents from Rampart. I urged other Concerns and Commonwealth agencies to be zealous 
in the DNA testing of their own personnel. 

Another piece of intelligence I passed on was the demicloning of Sam Yamamoto. 
Where—I asked rhetorically— 

was my real friend being held prisoner? Where were the other unwilling human DNA 
donors whose places had been taken by Haluk spies? Were they captives of the aliens—
as blue and miserable as I—or had they been callously executed after they had served 
their purpose? 

I told my listeners that the confessions being elicited from captured demis would 
probably come too late to be included in Delegate Sontag's Assembly summation. With 
luck, however, they might be released in time to influence tomorrow's vote. 

Keep tuned for late news at 2200 and 2300 hours! ... 

The last thing Ef Sontag asked me was, "Are the statements you have made here today 
truthful?" 

I said, "They are." And the psychotronic device socked it to me one last time, 
confirming it. 

Then, while the media people cafled out questions and Ef responded to a favored few, 
Bea Mangan detached me from the Hogan machine. Joanna gave me a drink of water and 
some painkiller perles. She wiped my streaming alien eyes and mopped my sweaty azure 
brow. 

"Delegate Sontag!" said PNN. "What reason would the Haluk have to spy on humanity 
with demiclones?" 

"That matter will be addressed inside the Assembly," he replied. 

"Do you have any evidence of demiclones infiltrating or influencing the Haluk 
Consortium of Concerns?" asked the Wall Street Journal. 

"Not at this time. The matter is under scrutiny." 

"Prominent Conservative party members have stated that the Haluk trade is vital to the 
continuing prosperity of the Hundred Concerns," said The Times. "Do you agree with that 
sentiment?" 

"I do not." 

Next, 20/20 Interactive asked, "Will the Liberal party call for revisions in the Haluk 


nonaggression and trade treaties if the new colonies are voted down?" 

"I can't speak for other Delegates. I will personally demand such revisions no matter 
how the vote goes." 

He shook his head negatively as more queries were shouted. 

"We have no more time for questions, ladies and gentlemen. It's almost 1400 hours 
and the afternoon session of the Assembly is about to begin. My committee and I will be 
presenting new evidence supporting a vast Haluk conspiracy against humanity. One of 
our witnesses will be the genuine Asahel Frost. After we've spoken, Delegates favoring 
the new Haluk colonies will summarize their position. A final vote on the measure will be 
taken tomorrow at 1000 hours Toronto time." 

He paused, taking a breath, then burst into an uncharacteristically passionate 
peroration. "Citizens of the Commonwealth, I urge you to observe the upcoming 
Assembly session. Use the PlaNet to inform your own Delegate of your reaction to this 
media conference and to the Assembly vote. Powerful commercial forces have exerted 
pressure on your Delegates, demanding that the three hundred new Haluk colonies be 
approved. These forces wish to ensure that trade with that race will continue without 
significant human oversight or inspection of Haluk planets in the Milky Way. Do not let 
this happen. Tell your Delegate that the Haluk cannot be trusted. Tell your Delegate that 
you will not permit Haluk demiclones to infiltrate human institutions and undermine our 
economy. Citizens—tell them! ... Thank you for listening." 

"A little showboaty," I whispered to Ef as we left the dais surrounded by a wall of 
security personnel, "but it's been that kind of a day." 

—— 

Politicians are often keen showmen. Ef Sontag, for all his natural reticence, was no 
exception. He decided it would bore our galactic audience—and the Delegates, most of 
whom had been listening avidly to the news conference one way or another—to repeat 
my genetic testing and psycho-Ironic interrogation inside the Assembly chamber. So Bea 
and Joanna would not be asked to testify after all. 

Ef arranged for the women to watch the proceedings from the VIP gallery. Maybe 
they'd meet Simon or Thora Scranton or Crista Wenzel up there. The other Rampart 
directors had declined to attend, either afraid of being cornered by the media or engaged 
in damage control at Rampart Tower. 

When the session warning-chime sounded, Ef and the six Delegates of his committee 
led me into the chamber. I had discarded the remnants of the Joru costume and was 
dressed once again in Dan's track suit, complete with twin burn-holes in the breast of the 
jacket. We took our places at small desks on the central testimony platform—alias "the 
floor"— that stood immediately before the Speaker's bench. Above the bench was a 
representation of the Great Seal of the Commonwealth, and behind that rose a colossal 
holoscreen that would show close-up images of persons addressing the Assembly. 

Semicircular tiers encompassed the chamber; inset within them were the shell-shaped 
carrels of the fifteen hundred legislators. About three-quarters of the delegates were 
physically present, and the rest were participating virtually. The spectator galleries and 
regular media boxes were packed. A quick flick of my desk display panned the VIP 
section. I didn't see any Rampart people, but Bea and Joanna had good seats. Most of the 
alien visitors occupied special loges at the front. 

I searched carefully—and there he was: the Big Blue Cheese himself, the Servant of 


Servants of Luk. 

In honor of the occasion, he'd forgone frivolous human attire and was garbed in 
magnificent rainbow-hued formal regalia, topped off with the ostentatious platinum 
diadem and ceremonial fossil jewelry. The SSL was surrounded by somber figures in 
black robes that I took to be the Council of Nine. No one seemed to know if their role 
was only advisory or if they enjoyed genuine authority. Other Haluk in handsome dress 
uniforms had to be a security force. There were at least two dozen of them crowded into 
the loge. 

Another chime. Silence fell. 

The Speaker, Aziza Alameri, called the session to order and invited those opposing the 
Haluk colony bill to give final testimony. There was some procedural backing and filling. 
Members of Sontag's committee presented a brief summation of their earlier arguments, 
then Ef himself called the first of only two witnesses who would be asked to support the 
summation. 

"If it please the Speaker and this Assembly: in evidence of ongoing Haluk hostility 
toward the Commonwealth of Human Worlds, I call Citizen Hengpin Kang, Sheltok Field 
Operations officer. He will testify under subpoena via sub-space communicator from his 
office on the planet Lethe in Zone 8." 

The giant holoscreen activated, and the real show began. 

—— 

SONTAG: Citizen Kang, have you been informed by Sheltok counsel of your legal rights 
and obligations relative to this Assembly subpoena? 

KANG: I have. 

SONTAG: Do you affirm that the statement you are about to make is completely truthful? 

KANG: I do. 

SONTAG: Are you aware that your statement may be verified sub duritia, by means of 
psychotronic interrogation, at the request of Assembly Delegates? 

KANG: I am. 

SONTAG: Very well. At this time the Assembly requires answers only to selected 
questions. We reserve the right to depose you in more depth at another time... My first 
question: Do you have personal knowledge of pirate attacks upon Sheltok 
transactinide carriers traversing the Sagittarius Whorl during the past twelve months? 

KANG: I do. 

SONTAG: Approximately how many such attacks have taken place during that time? 

KANG: I have personal knowledge of thirty-four. Others may have taken place that were 
not brought to my attention. 

SONTAG: How many of these attacks resulted in the hijacking of the carrier vessel or its 
unexplained disappearance? 

KANG: Twenty-eight. 

SONTAG: To which race did the pirate vessels belong? 

KANG: It wasn't always possible to tell. Some of them were certainly Y'tata. We've always 
had trouble with Y outlaws in Zones 3 and 4, most of it relatively minor. But in the 
past year or so ... Haluk corsairs have been positively identified in about half of the 
incidents, sometimes in company with Y'tata, sometimes not. 

SONTAG: To the best of your knowledge, has Sheltok Concern deliberately concealed 
knowledge of these Haluk attacks from Commonwealth authorities, from the media, or 


from Sheltok stakeholders? 

KANG: Our personnel received strict orders from Sheltok Earth management not to 
discuss the Haluk attacks with the media or the general public. I have no knowledge of 
whether stakeholders knew of them. Following regulations, my staff regularly reported 
hostile Haluk activity to Zone Patrol and to the Secretariat for Xenoaffairs. 

SONTAG: Did official action result from your reports? 

KANG: None that I was ever aware of. 

SONTAG: In your opinion, why has this Haluk activity been concealed? 

KANG: In my opinion ... so as not to inflame the citizenry against the Haluk trade treaty 
and the Haluk Consortium of Concerns. 

SONTAG: Is it true that, approximately seven months ago, the element carrier SBC-11942, 
Sheltok Eblis, under the command of Ulrich Schmidt, arrived at the planet Lethe and 
reported an attack by sixteen Haluk pirate ships? 

KANG: This is true. 

SONTAG: Is it true that Captain Schmidt's vessel was saved from hijacking or destruction 
by the intervention of an armed cruiser, human in conformation, whose identification 
was unknown? 

KANG: This is true. Captain Schmidt reported that the unknown human starship destroyed 
sixteen Haluk bandits. The cruiser commander identified himself only as Hugo. 
Captain Schmidt assumed he was a Good Samaritan smuggler, if you can imagine 
such a thing ... 

SONTAG: Thank you, Citizen Kang. You are excused. [To the Assembly:] The next 
witness, Asahel Frost, will also address this incident. First, however, my committee 
and I will ask him to provide background information on his personal involvement 
with the Haluk. 

—— 

Sontag read me the same caution that had been given to Kang. At the pleasure of the 
Assembly I could be interrogated later, till my eyeballs popped and blood flowed from 
every orifice. For now, I took a simple oath to tell the truth and nothing but. 

Then, with Ef and his fellow Delegates prompting me, I began to relate my adventures 
with the Haluk, beginning with the appearance of the titanic Haluk starship at Helly's 
Comet, in support of Alistair Drummond's scheme to seize control of Rampart Interstellar 
Corporation. I described my horrific adventures on Cravat and Dagasatt. I deplored the 
secret collusion of the Hundred Concerns that had enabled the Haluk to acquire advanced 
astrogation technology and other embargoed human science—including the genetic 
engineering therapy that had illicitly eradicated Haluk allomorphy. 

I didn't say a word about Emily's Mystery Mutant Exon, or my suspicion that the 
eradication therapy might not be permanent. 

I removed my jacket and showed my Halukoid torso— monstrously magnified on the 
holoscreen behind the Speaker's bench—as evidence that the Haluk were continuing to 
create demiclones. I stated that my own DNA had been stolen, and a Haluk demiclone of 
me had been created for the purpose of gaining control of Rampart, the Perseus Spur 
worlds under Rampart Mandate, and the genen vector PD32:C2 necessary to suppress 
Haluk allomorphy. I stated my opinion that the Haluk intended to use their Spur colonies 
as jump-off points for a general invasion of our galaxy, and then gave evidence to support 
my belief. 


I described my quixotic Barky Hunt, and what I had learned from Tregarth about the 
severe population crunch in the Haluk Cluster. It was hearsay, I admitted; nevertheless it 
provided a motive for the obstinate, even desperate, determination of the Haluk to 
migrate out of their home star-cluster. 

I admitted my personal intervention in the Haluk pirate attack upon Sheltok Eblis, 
confessing that I was Hugo. I had concealed my identity from Captain Schmidt because 
of personal notoriety and a desire not to compromise my search for Barky Tregarth. I 
stated that I was positive that the pirate ships were Haluk. 

Ef Sontag entered in evidence the report on the pirate attack I had sent to Karl 
Nazarian, as well as Captain Schmidt's report to Hengpin Kang. The Delegates would be 
able to read the documents at their leisure. 

I went on to tell how I was captured on Phlegethon, and how the demiclone agent 
Dolores da Gama had boasted to me that ultraheavy fuel elements were being stolen by 
the Haluk in order to cripple human starship capability and fuel an alien invasion fleet. 

Finally, I told what I knew of the Haluk Grand Design to overwhelm humanity, 
gleaned while I eavesdropped on the Servant of Servants and Council Locutor Ru Kamik 
as I floated in a dystasis tank in Macpherson Tower. I pointed a blue finger at the Servant 
himself—sudden close-up of his affronted face on the holoscreen—and invited him to 
submit to psychotronic interrogation and affirm that his people did not intend to use their 
Perseus Spur colonies as stepping-stones for an invasion of the Milky Way. 

Then I told Delegate Sontag and the Assembly that I had nothing further to say, and I 
was excused. 

Speaker Alameri invited the Servant of Servants of Luk to comment on my testimony. 

The Haluk leader declined the invitation to submit to a truth machine. He consented to 
give a brief voluntary statement, should the Assembly care to receive it. 

The Assembly did. So the Servant stepped onto an anti-gravity transporter that wafted 
him down to the floor, where Sontag and his committee and I were still seated. I gave a 
little finger-twiddle of greeting. The Servant stonily ignored me and delivered his speech 
in simultaneous translation. 

"Respected Speaker! Delegates of the Human Commonwealth! This one calls upon 
Almighty Luk to endorse the truths that follow, namely: 

"This one strongly asserts the opinion that the person calling himself Asahel Frost is 
an egregious liar—a scoundrel who attempts to vilify a noble race for evil motives of his 
own. He has taken on a simulacrum of Haluk form solely in order to mock and 
calumniate us. May Almighty Luk punish this contemptible person as he deserves! 

"Delegates of the Human Commonwealth Assembly: this one asserts that no Haluk-
human demiclones have been created since the signing of the Treaty of Nonaggression, 
which specifically forbade it. None! If counterfeit humans exist upon the planet Earth, 
they are agents created and employed by persons unknown to the Sovereign Haluk 
Confederation. 

"This one further asserts that, if Haluk corsairs are indeed operating in the Sagittarian 
arm of the galaxy, they do so without the authorization of our Sovereign Haluk 
Confederation. Any such ships are outlaws. We repudiate them and are eager to 
cooperate in their extermination. 

"In conclusion, this one pledges to the Human Commonwealth, and to the worthy 
Hundred Concerns that are the bulwark of its economy, the eternal goodwill of all peace-


loving and law-abiding Haluk people. There is no sinister Haluk Grand Design hostile to 
humanity. The Haluk do not contemplate invading the Milky Way. Such a notion is 
illogical. Orderly emigration has always been our objective. Your galaxy is huge, with 
countless desirable worlds having no sapient inhabitants. Haluk settlement of some of 
these worlds can only enhance galactic harmony and prosperity. The worthy Hundred 
Concerns concur in this belief. 

"Delegates! We Haluk are eternally grateful to the Commonwealth of Human Worlds 
for permitting us to colonize planets within your hegemony. We pledge to cooperate with 
all just human laws regulating interstellar commerce and social intercourse. We look 
forward to receiving from this Assembly the three hundred additional planets so 
generously proffered to us. 

"The Servant of Servants of Luk thanks you for your gracious attention. And now, as a 
token of our outrage and sorrow at the insult offered to us by the person calling himself 
Asahel Frost, the Haluk presence will withdraw forthwith. Wah!" 

The Servant then proceeded to stalk out of the chamber through the rotunda door. 
When I checked the gallery, the other Haluk observers had also disappeared. Big 
symbolic gesture, right? 

I was mistaken. They had something else in mind. 

Ef Sontag concluded his summation, then yielded the floor to the pro-Haluk faction. 

—— 

What followed was mostly a dreary anticlimax for me, three hours confined in Ef 
Sontag's carrel, during which the Conservatives tried to discredit or gloss over the new 
evidence presented by the opposition. The only good thing about their summation was the 
fact that Assembly rules prevented them from cross-examining me or Kang. 

"We gave it our best shot," Ef said. He'd called for water and analgesics to soothe my 
splitting head. What I really wanted was a triple shot of Jack Daniel's, but booze was 
contraindicated following psychotronic torture—even the comparatively mild version 
inflicted by the Hogan machine. 

"How did I really do, Ef ?" I asked him anxiously. "The Haluk Servant implied I was 
pulling a hoax. Do you think any of the Delegates will buy that?" 

He laughed. "You looked outlandish. No denying that. But your being blue helped our 
case. Only an idiot would believe that you underwent genen therapy and turned Halukoid 
in order to thumb your nose at the xenos and score political points. I can't say whether 
any of the pro-Haluk Delegates will be swayed by your testimony, but I guarantee that 
none of them will seriously entertain the notion that you're a hoaxer. You were 
impressive, Helly." 

"Impressive enough?" I muttered. "The Servant's Big Lie routine didn't incite any 
hisses or boos. I was watching some of the ranking Conservatives during his 
performance. They weren't worried or even indignant. Those pocket pols think just like 
the Hundred Concerns that own them—they're confident they can sweep even the most 
dangerous and uncomfortable facts under the rug, and citizens will be too apathetic or 
fearful to do anything about it." 

"This time, we might have a chance of beating the odds," Ef said. "Besides your own 
evidence of Haluk wrongdoing, there's Kang's deposition. And let's hope your people can 
wring something nice and damaging out of Fake Sam Yamamoto in time for the late 
night news posting. It would also help if a few more clones got flushed out of Rampart 


Tower and were positively ID'd as aliens." 

"I'll check with Karl right away and see what's happening," I said, and also reminded 
him about the starship Adam Stanislawski had sent to reconnoiter the presumed Haluk 
base at Amenti. "There's a slim chance it might report in before the vote." 

"I almost hope the ship finds nothing," he admitted gloomily. "The alternative is a 
really squirmy can of worms. A casus belli. I'm not ready for a war, Helly." 

Neither was the Commonwealth. Zone Patrol was spread much too thinly, especially 
in the Perseus Spur. If the Haluk launched an attack, humanity's main line of defense 
would be the fleets of the Hundred Concerns ... 

I phoned Karl at Rampart Tower and requested a progress report, turning on the phone 
speaker so Ef could listen in. Karl said that Fake Sam was still zonked from the two stun-
darts Joanna had shot him with; he would be fully consciousness in three more hours, 
whereupon his interrogation would begin. 

I said, "There are some important questions I want you to ask him." I enumerated 
them, then asked how things were progressing generally. 

"The building's in a state of lockdown. The executives and security personnel are 
being held under guard in four employee cafeterias, pending genetic profiling. Lesser 
personnel were allowed to leave after being cautioned not to talk to the media under pain 
of job-loss and disenfranchisement." 

"Ouch," I said. "Whose idea was that?" 

"Eve and Gunter Eckert gave the order. The genetic profiling is moving along as 
rapidly as possible, but it'll probably take all night." 

"Caught any blue fish?" 

"So far, five demiclones had been confirmed among intermediate level InSec 
personnel. The big news is an exec named Amadeo Guthrie, a Galapharma holdover. He's 
Deputy Chief Fleet Dispatch, and he's a Haluk. We just finished his preliminary grilling. I 
didn't want to go to full interrogation before checking with you." 

"Good one, Karl!" I enthused. "This bird will need special handling. Who's the CCID 
official in charge of the Rampart operation?" 

"A Chief Super named Gleb Khabarov. Seems sensible and efficient." 

"Ask him to witness the next phase of Guthrie's interrogation. You'll have to squeeze 
this mutt hard, and I want official corroboration of the gravity of the situation in case the 
clone dies on you. We need the names of all other demiclones working in top Rampart 
fleet positions, especially in the Perseus Spur. This is absolutely vital, Karl. We can't 
allow Haluk agents to have any control over our starships at this time. You're free to tell 
Khabarov that we're afraid of a sneak attack, particularly on Cravat or Seriphos. When 
you get the names, insist that Khabarov have the demis arrested by Spur CCID. If he 
gives you any back-talk, call Adam Stanislawski." 

"You really think the Haluk might move before the vote?" 

"I don't know what the bastards will do. Call me when you get something solid out of 
Guthrie. Is there any word on Alistair Drummond?" 

"Nothing." 

"Okay. Talk to you in a while." I broke the connection. 

Ef said, "Scary stuff. But I think the Haluk will wait for the vote." 

"I hope you're right." 

I dozed for a while, overcome by reaction to the stress. Then I was suddenly wide-


awake again, remembering something I'd forgotten to ask Bea Mangan. Fortunately, she 
and Joanna were still in the VIP gallery, sticking it out to the bitter end. 

I phoned her and asked the question, keeping the speakerphone activated for Ef's sake. 

She replied, "Yes, the six researchers did finish their experiments with the mutant 
telomeric exon. As far as they can determine, it's a powerful inhibitor that staves off 
sequence degradation. In layman's terms, it keeps one set of genes— let's call them bad 
genes—from turning off another set of good genes. Of course, the researchers had no 
notion of the precise function of the good gene/bad gene sequences. That was our little 
secret. Given the limitations of the experiment, the researchers couldn't provide me with 
precise timing of the turnoff. Or identify the sequence that would be affected." 

"But we know what it has to be, don't we!" 

"I can only presume that Emily Konigsberg didn't permanently eradicate 
allomorphism in the Haluk after all. I've been studying her notes for months. By inserting 
human genes, she intended not only to eliminate the trait in the engineered Haluk 
individual, but also in the individual's germ line, so that offspring of treated parents 
would be nonallomorphic, too. That's a complicated piece of work." 

"Bea, I think Emily's therapy is already failing." I told her about the warehoused 
testudos I'd seen in Macpherson Tower. 

"How interesting." On the phone display, Bea looked both thoughtful and 
apprehensive. "I wonder if the testudos will morph into normal allomorphic graciles on 
schedule? They might not, you know. They might not morph at all." 

The implications of that hit me like a kick in the stomach. "Haluk technicians were 
watching the warehoused ones. Each testudo was being biomonitored. If they don't 
hatch..." 

She smiled sadly. "If I were a Haluk who had undergone therapy, I'd be very pissed 
off at humanity. Paradise Lost, and all that. Do you have any idea how many Haluk have 
received the treatment?" 

"Jesus. I think it started in a small way nearly eight years ago. Since the trade treaties 
went into effect, millions of them must have been treated. But wouldn't Haluk scientists 
have spotted the problem and called a halt to the therapy? I mean, my God—" 

"Perhaps the reversion has only just begun," Bea said. "On the individuals who were 
among the earliest treated." 

I was trying to remember something. "While I was eavesdropping on the Haluk in 
dystasis, the Council Locutor, Ru Kamik, made some derogatory remarks about Emily 
Konigsberg. The Haluk name for her was Milik. Ru Kamik said, 'This one has recently 
heard that some of Milik's work on the eradication of allomorphism has come under 
scrutiny.' The Servant of Servants denied that anything was wrong. But he would, 
wouldn't he?" 

"You know, Helly, even if a renewed course of therapy reestablishes the 
nonallomorphic gracile state, the Haluk would still require periodic treatment all 
throughout their lives." 

I said, "Yeah. From a limited supply of PD32:C2, harvested from one small Perseus 
planet. The stuff won't grow in the lab." 

"I've heard rumors that Rampart is working hard to synthesize the viral vector," she 
said, "but so far without success. Haluk scientists are probably trying, too. Unfortunately, 
they aren't very experienced in the field of designer-virus construction." 


Ef Sontag broke in. "But what does it mean, Bea, from a political standpoint?" 

"Damned if I know," she said. "But we'll probably find out." 

"Will the human demiclones revert also?" 

"Unfortunately, no. The genes for Haluk allomorphy are completely eliminated by 
demiclone therapy—not merely suppressed, as happens in the much less drastic 
eradication treatment." 

Ef said, "That could have ominous implications." 

"I thought so," Bea agreed. 

"What? What?" My brain was badly in need of rebooting. I didn't have the faintest 
idea what they were talking about. 

"It's rather far-fetched," Bea said. "But if the Haluk discover that allomorph-
eradication therapy is invariably fatal, they may be tempted to go the demiclone route. 
All it would require is the synthesis of PD32:C2 ... and an unlimited supply of human 
DNA." 

—— 

Finally, the interminable Assembly session adjourned. Ef 's final call for a citizen 
referendum was voted down, as we had expected. But the gesture had been made and the 
stage set for a potential citizen veto. 

When it was all over, he escorted me to the large skyport at the top of Assembly 
House. Bea and Joanna had agreed to meet us there, and Ef had mentioned that he 
intended to fly Bea Mangan to her home in Fenelon Falls. I assumed he'd see Joanna 
home as well. 

He called for his private hopper and I asked dispatch to send the aircraft Adam 
Stanislawski had promised to provide for me. The skyport concourse wasn't very 
crowded yet and no journalists harassed us. They were busy doing reaction coverage 
downstairs, where every pundit in the capital would have opinions to express and 
predictions to make. Many of the Delegates were still conferring with their staff members 
or frantically consulting web pollsters to find out what kind of impact the day's 
sensational events would have on their constituents. No doubt the syndics of the Hundred 
Concerns—including John Ellington—were lobbying like mad to influence tomorrow's 
vote. 

It was a scene neither Ef Sontag nor I wanted any part of. We'd had enough limelight 
for one day. 

The two women finally emerged from the transporter and found us waiting in the 
ready-room. Bea Mangan was pulling an AG tote with her equipment, and Ef hurried to 
take charge of it and have it loaded aboard his hopper. 

"Did you get lots of hot poop for your new book, Professor?" I asked Joanna. 

"Today's action will provide at least two outstanding chapters," she said. "But the plot 
is still thickening." 

"That's what I'm afraid of," I said wearily. "It can thicken without me." 

A fast getaway was all I wanted right now, and after that the empty white silence of 
the Ontario north country, where I planned to hole up until I decided how to recreate my 
shattered life. 

"Will we have time to stop and shop on the way?" Joanna asked me. 

I looked at her without comprehending. "Shop?" 

"Well, it probably wouldn't be prudent to go back to my town house for clothes and 


things." 

When I persisted in stupidity mode, she smiled. "My dear, I'm coming with you to 
your hideout! There's so much more I need to know. The deep background of your anti-
Haluk crusade." 

"Your book's going to be about me?" I couldn't conceal my dismay. 

"Of course! You're a public figure, a freelance provocateur, a cage rattler. Did you 
think you could do your thing and then slip offstage without anyone taking notice? Gun-
slinger comes to town, raises righteous hell, rides off into the sunset?" 

"No, but—" 

"Your story will personalize the controversy, catch the interest of nonacademic 
readers. As we say in the trade, you will be my hook. By the way, my publisher is very 
interested. I called her during your testimony. She was watching, of course. Along with 
almost everyone else having PlaNet access." 

"A book sounds like a great idea," Bea said. "I'd download a copy." 

I groaned. "Joanna, this affair isn't over. Political-science-wise, it's hardly begun." 

"But your direct participation in it is done, isn't it?" 

"God, I hope so. I'm so tired of tilting at blue windmills! Whichever way the vote goes 
tomorrow, I believe the Haluk are heading for a fall. Their demiclones will be exposed, 
along with the Sagittarian piracy and the other shit they've been pulling inside the 
Concerns. After the smoke clears, the Haluk treaties will be revised. There's no real 
possibility of a cover-up or a reversion to the status quo. Too many genies have been let 
out of the bottle." 

Ef Sontag had returned from the baggage bot and was listening with approval. "A 
book that told the entire story would help ensure that," he said. "Joanna's right." 

"Of course I am," Professor DeVet said serenely. 

"What are your immediate plans?" Ef asked me. 

"I'm going to kick back and take it easy. After the vote, who knows? Eventually I'll 
have to go back into the tank for a month or so to be restored, but God knows when I'll 
get around to doing it. If you need me, I'll be available for a few weeks, anyhow. I 
promised my father to help pull Rampart back on track, but I won't let that become a full-
time job. During the Galapharma trial, I devoted nearly every waking minute to Rampart. 
That'll never happen again." 

"Good," said Joanna. "You don't owe them that." 

"I don't owe them anything," I said grimly. "They owe me. And if Eve or anyone else 
starts putting stumbling blocks in my way, I'll be out of there faster than a lobo with a 
knot in his tail, and Rampart can go straight to hell." 

Ef was watching the overhead dispatch display. "Here's my hopper. Come along, Bea. 
Helly, Joanna, keep safe." The two of them went off. 

I threw my former wife a look that mingled panic and confusion. 

She smiled and put a hand on my shoulder. "If you really don't want me with you now, 
I'll respect that. I can take a taxi home." 

"No! I mean—" What did I mean? 

"The stress of the past days must be unbearable. I apologize for trying to intrude. If 
you need quiet time alone, we can talk about the book later." 

The dispatch display showed that the aircraft for Helmut Icicle was ready. 

I took her hand, pulled her toward the door leading to the hopper pad. "Dammit! I do 


want you to come. We'll watch the vote taken tomorrow, then see what comes down. You 
can tell me what it all means from a galactopolitical point of view." 

She laughed. "All right. But I mean it about stopping for the clothes." 

—— 

The ship was a big mean-looking Mitsubishi-Kondo that wore the white and gold 
Macrodur colors and the Big M corporate crest. It had full defensive shields, significant 
armament, a subspace communicator, an ultraencrypted phone link, and a well-appointed 
bedroom. 

"How long did you say our trip would take?" Joanna inquired in a throaty purr. 

I sighed. "Not long enough. Besides, I'm a useless wreck, babe." 

"Then a holiday is just what you need." 

"It won't take long to get where we're going, even if we stop and shop. This boat 
toddles along at three kay per. Adam lent us a lovely ride." 

We settled in on the flight deck. "He seems like a very nice man," Joanna remarked. 
"He lives up to his reputation. No wonder the other Concerns hate Macrodur." 

"Yeah. Imagine a businessman who doesn't put business first . . ." 

We lofted into the air, moving slowly northward under the control of Toronto Conurb 
ATZ. The atmosphere was so thick with trapped mist that it was hard to distinguish one 
tower from another, but our hopper was not immediately vectored out from under the 
force-field. Instead, we came to a dead stop in midair, joining multiple stalled processions 
of other aircraft. A moment later the force-field's golden umbrella winked out. The mist 
that had been held beneath it was torn to bits by sudden wind, and snowflakes swirled 
around us. 

"What the hell?" I murmured, and began querying the navigator. 

"Helly, look!" Joanna exclaimed, pointing outside. 

A train of starship gigs was descending out of the storm toward the city center. There 
must have been thirty or forty of them, large and beetle-shaped and decorated with 
cobalt-blue lights. 

They began to touch down at the Macpherson Tower sky-port. 

"I'll be damned," I said. "The Haluk are leaving!" 

I used the hopper's sensitive scanner to clarify the scene and was proved right. The 
aliens had somehow obtained permission to embark directly from their tower into Earth 
orbit, without using Oshawa Starport. 

"But why?" Joanna asked in bewilderment. "Is this what the Servant meant by 
withdrawing the Haluk presence? Is it some formal expression of wounded dignity?" 

"I hope that's what it is," I said. But a ghost-icicle had materialized at the back of my 
neck. 

The aerial exodus lasted about forty minutes, while hopper traffic above Toronto 
remained totally paralyzed and the snowfall thickened, causing mild havoc on the streets 
below. 

I surfed the news channels. The media were giving the amazing event a big play, even 
broadcasting satellite views of a monstrous alien starship waiting in low geosynchronous 
orbit for the return of its auxiliaries. It was the flagship of the Servant of Servants. I'd 
seen it myself twice before, under more ominous circumstances. 

When the last gig vanished into the sky, the force-field umbrella was turned on again. 
Air traffic resumed its normal pattern. The capital of the Commonwealth of Human 


Worlds went about its interrupted business and so did we, escaping the restricted airspace 
of the conurbation and rising to our cruising altitude in the ionosphere. 

Had all of the Haluk gone away? 

Absolutely not, the media reported breathlessly. Reporters' phone calls to the official 
Haluk embassy codes were answered—curtly. No comments would be forthcoming from 
Haluk sources until after tomorrow's Assembly vote. The Servant's flagship was "on a 
meditative cruise." 

Macpherson Tower was shielded against scanners, as were most of the commercial 
and government buildings in the central city; however, persons of Halukoid physique had 
been observed moving in front of undraped windows. One enterprising media snoop even 
analyzed water usage in the upper half of the tower—and concluded that Haluk toilets 
were being flushed. Lots of the aliens were still in there! 

Hoppers carrying tabloid websters that attempted unauthorized landings on the 
Macpherson skyport were shooed away, as always, by Haluk guards armed with riot-
batons. Elevator access was blocked, as usual, by Haluk security personnel. Neither 
CCID nor the Enforcement Division of Xenoaffairs attempted to enter the tower by force. 
Technically, the top two-thirds of it was still alien soil, and no Commonwealth judge was 
empowered to issue a warrant to search it. 

Yet. 

Half dozing in the command seat as we soared through the sky under autopilot, I 
wondered whether my brother Dan was still inside Macpherson Tower. Was Alistair 
Drummond hiding there, too, along with other blown demiclone spies who had infiltrated 
other establishments in the capital? Minor genplas makeovers and iris implants would 
enable them to assume alternate identities. If they avoided sensitive occupations, demis 
might easily be able to fade away into the general population—especially on the free-soil 
worlds. All human beings had a genetic profile made at birth, but retesting everyone 
would be prohibitively expensive. 

It was more likely that both the Haluk and their demiclone agents were simply biding 
their time as we were, awaiting the outcome of the all-important vote. 

Nothing of any importance, I believed, could happen until then. 


Chapter 10 

 

Now arriving Timmins Municipality ATZ. Please supply next routing. 

I started awake at the sound of the navigator's voice. Joanna had also closed her eyes 
during the half hour or so it had taken us to travel the first leg of our journey. She yawned 
and stretched and looked out the side window of the flight deck. 

We were in a holding pattern at ten thousand meters. We'd left the snowstorm behind, 
and the clear night sky blazed with stars; there was no moon. The total blackness of the 
land surface was relieved by widely scattered patches of twinkling lights that marked 
small communities, plus a single urban constellation of moderate size directly beneath us. 

"Timmins, Ontario?" she murmured in disbelief, checking the navigation display. 
"This is your secret hideout?" 

Timmins was a former mining center 180 miles north of Lake Huron, now a hub for an 
assortment of wilderness recreation areas. 

"It's your one-stop shopping mall," I told her. "We're about halfway to our destination, 
a place called Kingfisher Lodge, another six hundred fifty klicks northwest of here. The 
lodge is a great big comfortable house that Rampart once used for corporate junkets and 
executive family holidays. Nice lake—although that'll be frozen over by now." 

I said to the navigator, "Land at Timmins Municipal Sky-port. Proceed to the general 
aviation terminal." 

En route. 

"Is the lodge very isolated?" Joanna asked. 

"There's a little town called Central Patricia about ninety kilometers west of it, maybe 
four hundred souls. Otherwise, nothing but bush, a few trails and unpaved roads. No one 
lives in Kingfisher Lodge during the winter months, but it's always heated and 
maintained. Domestic robots keep it clean and in good repair. It has a storehouse full of 
staple foods and all kinds of other supplies. It also has an exceptionally good security 
system, which is the main reason I decided to stash myself there." 

The hopper was plunging inertialessly toward the ground. We'd land within a few 
minutes. I gave Joanna the Macrodur corporate niobium credit card that I'd found waiting 
for me on the hopper's instrument console. 

"Use this to buy whatever special edibles and winter clothing and personal items you 
think we might need. Keep my damned wasp-waist in mind when you buy my snow gear. 
And no gloves for me, either. My four weird fingers won't fit. Stick with mittens." 

"I understand." 

"Take as long as you like to shop. We're in no hurry. As a matter of fact, I need time to 
make a few important phone calls. The Timmins e-merchants and mallearmoire services 
will deliver right to the hopper. I'll stay out of sight while the stuff is stowed aboard." 

"I wonder—does the lodge have equipment for crosscountry skiing?" She smiled in 
reminiscence. "It might be fun for us to do that again ... unless you think we should stay 
indoors." 

"No, of course not. Why don't you buy skis and envirosuits for us. I know there are 
snowmobiles at the lodge. We can play with them, too." 

We flew over Timmins at low altitude, heading for the skyport north of town. It was 
only 1935 hours and the place was wide-awake. 

"I've never driven a snowmobile," Joanna said. "Is it risky?" 


"Not if you travel at a reasonable speed and stay off thin ice. The snow won't be very 
deep this early in the season. Tell you what. Give me your phone. I'll program it with my 
own dex and links. That way you'll have instant access to all of Rampart's services in an 
emergency. And you won't end up locked outside the security perimeter or unable to 
access the in-house systems if I get stomped by a bull moose or something." 

She gave me a sidelong glance. " 'Or something.' Are you talking about danger from 
the Haluk?" 

"I'm just saying that in the wilderness, Mother Nature can get you if you don't watch 
out—or even if you do. It's only sensible to take precautions. As the for the Haluk... I 
suppose they could come after me, if they knew where to look. But I've covered our 
tracks pretty well. And now that the Helly-demiclone cat is out of the bag, they no longer 
have any compelling motive for shutting my mouth. Actually, after the Servant's denials 
in the Assembly today, it would be counterproductive for them to try it." 

"True." But she looked troubled as she rummaged in her shoulder bag and handed me 
her phone. "I'm afraid it's just an inexpensive thing. It doesn't even have video." 

I checked the instrument out. It was a real clunker, at least five years old. "We'll need 
a model with a bit more pizzazz. Why don't you pick up a Lucevera 4500 just like mine. 
I'll teach you how to make it do some great tricks." 

She tucked the phone back into her bag with a sigh. "You probably think I'm a 
hopeless Luddite. To me a phone is just something for talking into, or accessing the odd 
bit of data when I'm away from my computer." 

We were on the ground now—actually hovering just above it—drifting after a FOLLOW 
ME bot that led us to a parking bay. Timmins had a nice little skyport with heated 
pavement, but there was no force-umbrella and the air temperature was around minus-ten 
Celsius. I conversed with the general aviation desk and arranged for a short stay 
undercover, then turned back to Joanna. 

"Tell me the truth, babe. Are you having second thoughts about this jaunt? If so, you 
can catch a commercial flight back to Toronto in a couple of hours." 

"No. I'm going with you," she insisted. "About our fresh food and wine: How long will 
we be at the lodge?" 

I hadn't thought much about that. Besides the basic security considerations, I had a 
compelling need to put distance between myself and the chaos in Toronto while still 
remaining accessible for long distance consultation. Whether I'd be able to indulge 
myself depended on one of the phone calls I was about to make. 

"How long would you like to stay?" I asked Joanna. 

"We could try it for a week," she said softly, after hesitating a moment. "I'll call my 
department secretary tomorrow and plead urgent family business. It's more or less the 
truth." 

"Are we ... a family, Joanna?" 

She smiled sadly. "I don't know the answer to that, Helly. I don't know you—and I'm 
talking about the man inside the blue skin, not the captivating alien who had his wicked 
way with me." 

My laugh, at least, was still human. "I beg your pardon, Professor. Who seduced 
whom?" 

She gave a wry shrug. "I confess. You were irresistible." Her expression became 
somber. "But you've changed so much over the years we've been apart. I can sense it, 


even in the short time we've been together again. Those stories you told..." Her eyes 
clouded. "You're more driven, more adamant, less vulnerable. Perhaps it's a good thing." 
But she didn't sound convinced. 

"I think I'm also a lot wiser than I was when I left you. It was the worst mistake of my 
life. But I was devastated by what had happened. I didn't want your pity. That, on top of 
everything else—" 

"It wasn't pity I felt for you then! It was love." 

I had to ask the question. "How do you feel about me now?" 

"I don't know." She looked away. 

"I love you. What I did—giving in to despair, not trusting you—was stupid and 
cowardly. I'd like to start again. This damned body of mine—" 

"That's not a factor, Helly. It's only a distraction." 

"What is a factor?" 

She seemed to take a deep breath before plunging ahead. "For one thing, I was very 
disturbed when you said that you'd killed your Haluk demiclone in cold blood. It wasn't 
self-defense, then? Did you really mean what you said?" 

"I meant it." 

"Will you tell me about it?" 

"I'd rather not." I had glossed over the incident when recounting it earlier. 

"I'm not morbidly curious. I'm trying to understand." 

Understand what goes on inside a killer's head ... 

"All right." I spoke slowly and calmly. My stiff Halukoid features were a useful mask 
to hide behind. "I woke in a kind of hospital room inside Macpherson Tower. There were 
alien medics tending me for a while, and then they went away. I didn't realize at first that 
my body had been transformed. When I discovered what had been done to me, and found 
the unconscious demiclone lying in a bed across the room, I knew what the Haluk were 
going to do with him. Even knew why they'd let me live. I was going to be forced to tutor 
my double in his role as me. I smothered him with a pillow." 

She nodded slowly, unwilling to comment. 

"It wasn't revenge, Joanna." But as I said it, I had to wonder. "It was mortal combat. 
An act of war against an enemy that intended to use my persona to further their 
conspiracy against humanity." 

"But there is no war!" 

"The Haluk Grand Design is equivalent to war. And demicloning is a weapon. I had a 
right and an obligation to prevent that weapon from being used against us. Fake Helly 
had no right to live, any more than a dog infected with rabies has. There was no way I 
could cure the demi of his ... condition. All I could do was prevent him from using it to 
harm the Human Commonwealth." 

She spoke calmly. "You killed him because he stole your identity and was going to 
insinuate himself into Rampart. Not because you believed he was going to harm anyone." 

"I admit that those notions were in my mind. But there were larger considerations as 
well. You don't know the Haluk as I do, the monstrous things they've done. What they 
intend to do. And you have no idea of my real feelings about Rampart. I don't love the 
Concern or live for it, the way Eve does. And I certainly would never kill for it." 

But it wasn't my motivation that distressed Joanna so much as the state of my 
conscience. 


"When you killed the clone ... didn't you feel any remorse?" Her tone was now almost 
desperate. I knew the reassurance she wanted, but I couldn't give it to her. She had a right 
to the truth. 

"What I felt was revulsion," I told her. "Regret that the actions were necessary. But I 
had no sense of doing wrong and certainly no remorse. I wasn't sorry then and I'm not 
sorry now. Do you remember my telling you and the others about the two hundred 
demiclones in the secret lab on Dagasatt? I killed them deliberately, too, because it 
seemed necessary at the time. I've had nightmares about it for years, and I'll probably 
dream about snuffing Fake Helly when my overloaded brain gets the incident fully 
processed. I killed because I had to, Joanna. If you can't bring yourself to accept that—" 

She lifted her hand, touched the side of my alien face. Tears welled in her eyes. "I'll 
try. I'll do my best to try to understand. When I see what the Haluk did to you—your poor 
face, the lost smile that I loved so much, the rest of your body—I'm so sorry, Helly! I 
didn't intend to make it worse for you." She threw her arms around me, buried her head in 
my chest. "But it's hard." 

Hard to love, easy to pity. 

I said, "Let it alone. Put it out of your mind, at least for a week. Please, Joanna." 

"All right," she said, drawing away, trying to smile. "I'll begin by applying woman's 
sovereign remedy: shopping." 

—— 

While she was inside the terminal, I retreated to the hopper's bedroom to make the first 
of the phone calls. After engaging encryption, I programmed the data-strip to identify me 
by my real name, sans code ID. I left the video option engaged, then buzzed my old pal 
and political antagonist Geraldo Gonzalez, the lone Delegate of the Reversionist party. 
Our conversation was brief—with a predictable preamble when he saw my face. 

"Gerry, it's Helly." 

"Jesus! ... Oh, man! I watched the news conference and nearly had a heart attack. And 
then your performance in the Assembly—" 

"What did you think of it? Was I credible?" 

"I sure as hell accepted your story. You know why? Because one of the first things the 
impostor did when he mysteriously returned from Sagittarius was cut off Asahel Frost's 
financial support of the party! You and I haven't always seen eye-to-eye on political 
strategy, but I couldn't believe you'd abandon us without an explanation. That asshole 
absolutely refused to meet with me. All he'd say was that he'd had a change of heart." 

"That was true enough, metaphorically speaking." 

"So he was a Haluk impostor! Did you manage to nab him?" 

"The demiclone has vanished," I said, not correcting his error of fact. "God only 
knows what kind of a mess he left my financial affairs in, but I wanted to assure you that 
my funding of the Reversionist cause will be restored as soon as possible. Meanwhile, I'll 
see that you get a generous string-free contribution directly from Rampart." 

"Thank you ... Helly." He was still uncomfortable connecting the identity to the blue 
face. Couldn't blame him. 

"I'm back on the Rampart board," I told him, "and I've taken over as Rampart 
president. We're weeding Haluk demiclones out of the Concern with the help of CCID, 
and we'll release their names and their confessions as soon as possible. I intend to do 
everything in my power to show up the Servant of Servants as a roaring bullshit artist." 


Gonzalez was nodding his agreement. "Yes. Yes. Throw that lying speech of his right 
back in his teeth! Jesus God— how many Haluk spies do you suppose we're going to find 
hiding in the woodpile?" 

A good question. "Gerry, have the Assembly Delegates ever submitted to DNA 
profiling?" 

"Sontag proposed it in mid-September, when his committee hearings were really 
raising a media stink. The measure was voted down. A few Liberal Delegates followed 
Sontag's example and were tested anyhow. There were also rumors that your man 
Nazarian did some clandestine testing six months ago and found zip." 

"I put him up to that. But a lot could have happened in half a year." 

"Fuckin' A. After today you can bet your life the DNA testing measure will be 
reintroduced by constituent demand. Maybe I can do it myself! My office is being 
deluged with mail from worried citizens—and most of them aren't even Reverse voters. 
I'm not the only Delegate getting an earful, either. The Liberals I've talked to say the 
volume of negative comment is unprecedented. The Conservatives are keeping mum and 
looking worried." 

"Good. That's what I wanted to hear. Well, I'll let you go now. I just wanted to 
reassure you about my commitment to the party and its principles." 

"Umm ... you should know that we've taken a slightly different direction since the 
Sontag committee hearings began. The push for preindustrial Insap rights lost its popular 
appeal with the disclosure of the Haluk demiclone threat. We switched our emphasis to 
the corrupt influence of the Hundred Concerns—especially the Haluk Consortium—on 
Commonwealth political decision-making. We blame them for letting the Haluk situation 
get out of control, pushing those ineffective treaties through. Our current push is for 
prompt treaty revision." 

"I agree one hundred percent. We'll talk later, Gerry." 

I touched the End pad, thinking that the Reversionist party wasn't the only one that 
would have to rethink its strategy during the days ahead. 

Especially if the Haluk colony vote went the way I feared it would. 

I tapped out Karl Nazarian's code. It was several minutes before he answered. He 
looked calm and assured, and somewhere along the line he'd ditched the incongruous 
caterer's coverall and donned an elegant business suit that would have done John 
Ellington proud. Both men had about the same build. Maybe the vice chairman had 
shared. 

"Do you have time to give me a progress report?" I asked. "I'm on my way to the safe 
house. With Joanna." 

"I see." The old security man kept a perfectly straight face. "Are you going to reveal 
your secret bolt-hole to me?" 

"Kingfisher Lodge. Don't tell anyone else." 

Karl nodded his approval. "Yeah, that might be just about perfect. God knows none of 
the paparazzi websters will find you up there. We pretty much shut the lodge down after 
Dan's abduction, but there was no important damage to the physical plant, and the fritzed 
security system was repaired. Do you have portable weapons?" 

"The hopper Adam loaned me has a locker full of top-drawer assault gear. Supplying 
computers to the Commonwealth must be dangerous work." 

Karl chuckled. "High-paying, anyhow. You want me to let Stanislawski know where 


you are?" 

"I'll tell him myself. What's happening in Toronto? Any trace of Drummond? I figure 
he's either hiding in Macpherson Tower or else the Servant of Servants took him away in 
the Haluk flagship for some strenuous debriefing." 

"Maybe not. Makebate's gone." 

"Shit—I didn't even realize the ship had survived Phlegethon!" 

"Fake Helly drove her back to Earth, claiming he'd been held captive by Y'tata corsairs 
for six weeks. Since then Drummond has taken the ship all over the galaxy, overseeing 
the Rampart-Gala consolidation. He's even been to Artiuk, the Haluk GHQ in the Spur. 
No telling where he's headed now if he's driving that dazzle-boat of yours. A Macrodur 
security team checked Makebate's berth at Oshawa Starport and found her gone. She 
jumped the line and lifted off for an unspecified destination just before noon. That would 
have been shortly after Fake Sam called Drummond's code from the boardroom. The ship 
manifest listed a pilot named Helmut Icicle." 

"That wiseass! Thumbing his goddamn nose at me... I'm surprised he didn't wait to see 
if Fake Sam regained control of the boardroom situation." 

"Probably figured it wasn't going to happen," Karl said. "Think about it." 

"Yeah. Well, it's probably for the best if Drummond just drops out of sight. We 
certainly don't want to bring him to trial. Let the galaxy believe that an anonymous Haluk 
was my double." 

"There's no trace of Makebate's fuel signature within a hundred light-years of Earth. 
He's had all the time in the world to make a clean break. Zone Patrol's on alert, and 
Rampart has put a hefty price on the head of the John Doe perp who stole the starship. 
Makebate is so distinctive that Drummond won't dare take her to any important human 
world." 

"Let's hope he ends up on Bumfuck-Beta in the Crab Nebula," I grumped. "What's the 
situation now in Rampart Tower? Have you been able to question Fake Sam?" 

"Yes. The Haluk Grand Design is just what you suspected: a plan for conquest by 
subversion. Demiclones were supposed to infiltrate Commonwealth government agencies 
and the Hundred Concerns over a period of years. According to Sam, they already have a 
fair number of maggots inside the Concerns, but relatively few in the government." 

"Did you ask him about Assembly Delegates?" 

"Yes, but he had no information. I suppose it figures. Most espionage systems are 
compartmentalized." 

"Tell me more about the Grand Design." 

"No real surprises. While the demiclone insertion continued, Haluk colonies in the 
Milky Way were supposed to expand as rapidly as possible. They'd build up their starship 
fleets, their scientific and technical establishments, and their heavy industry, with help 
from unsuspecting humanity. Eventually the Commonwealth authority structure would be 
so riddled with alien subversives that it would fall without much of a fight. Sam didn't 
know the precise Grand Design timetable. That's in the hands of the Haluk Council of 
Nine." 

"Not the Servant of Servants?" I was surprised. 

"Sam said the SSL concocted the original scheme, but he ultimately answers to the 
Nine. Their offices are hereditary and they act as repositories of racial wisdom and 
conscience. They don't overrule the Servant very often, though. He receives his authority 


directly from the Haluk common people—hence his title." 

"Interesting. Did Fake Sam know whether an imminent attack on humanity is being 
contemplated?" 

"No. He isn't privy to military strategy. He was trained in human corporate law and 
only assumed his position a couple of months ago. It was fortuitous that he went to 
Rampart rather than some other Concern. It's not easy for the Haluk to insert ringers in 
really high places without arousing suspicion, so they're forced to wait until an 
appropriate opportunity presents itself. The real Sam Yamamoto was granted an 
extensive leave of absence not long after you took off for Phlegethon, with the 
understanding that he'd be promoted and raised to the board on his return. It was a perfect 
setup for the Haluk to plug in their man." 

"Did you find out what happened to the real Sam?" 

"The demi says he's locked up in Macpherson Tower. The Haluk kept him alive for 
what the fake called 'coerced consultation.' There are nearly three hundred other DNA 
donors being held prisoner there for the same reason. Not all from Rampart." 

"Christ! ... Karl, we've got to do something about them before the Haluk decide to 
eliminate incriminating witnesses." 

"I've already got Hector working on it. There's no way short of a declaration of war 
that CCID or ECID can search an alien embassy without permission. But embassies have 
been stormed by inflamed mobs of citizens before. I guess it all comes down to the 
principle you quoted in your infamous Wall Street Journal interview: we can do whatever 
we please, so long as we don't give a damn about the consequences." 

"Kelly's Rules," I murmured, "come back to haunt me. Okay. Do it! Just have Hector 
and his hooligans wait until after Toronto's 2300 hour newscast... Did Fake Sam give you 
the names of other demi agents inside Rampart?" 

"So far we have Amadeo Outline, our biggest fish, thirty-six Internal and External 
security people ranging from colonel to grunt, and forty-five relatively low-ranking 
personnel in the Finance and Data Processing departments. Sam also named twelve high-
ranking executives working for other Haluk Consortium Concerns. They were the only 
outsiders he could recall offhand. I've already passed that information on to CCID and 
ICS. We'll get more names out of Sam during the next interrogation session when we go 
to deep-probe. He's resting now." 

"Right. Now tell me about Amadeo Guthrie." 

"Pure gold!" Karl grinned triumphantly. "He opened a secret file in his personal 
computer that listed over sixty demiclones in crucial Rampart fleet positions on Seriphos, 
Tyrins, Hygeia, Asklepios, and Caduceus. Dispatchers, Fleet Security starship officers, 
even an Assistant Maintenance Chief at Seriphos Starport. With luck, they're being 
rounded up right now. We're getting the situation under control." 

"Karl, I want the names of all Rampart demiclones in custody released to the media in 
time for tonight's late news posting. We need to arouse public opinion—make the 
invasion of Macpherson Tower morally justifiable." 

"I can't release the names myself, Helly. I don't have the authority. If I leaked them 
anonymously, only the tabloids would pick them up. You need the information posted on 
legitimate media sites." 

"All right, I'll talk to Eve about it. You pass the names on to her immediately, along 
with any other confession material that might make a splash. Just one last question: When 


your gang did the secret DNA testing of the Assembly Delegates, did they find any 
ringers?" 

"Not a one. We tested a fair number of staffers, too. They were all human seven 
months ago." 

"Okay. Keep up the good work. And let me know how Hector's plan to storm the 
embassy shapes up." 

I ended the call, got myself a cup of coffee from the hopper's tiny galley, and drank it 
down scalding, cursing the impossibility of having a real drink for at least two more 
hours. I could have used some Dutch courage before making the call to Eve, which would 
determine whether Joanna and I continued on to Kingfisher Lodge or returned to Toronto. 

Under normal circumstances, even with the Haluk out to fry my fanny, I'd probably 
have stayed at Rampart Tower and worked with the others on damage control, at least 
until after the Assembly vote. But I wasn't normal—not mentally and certainly not 
physically. I was walking wounded and desperately in need of a timeout. Trouble was, I 
was afraid my older sister might be, too. 

She picked up on the third buzz. 

"What is it?" Her face was haggard but her hair was still perfect. She recognized me 
instantly and didn't flinch. 

"I'm on my way to a safe house. I plan to stay undercover for a while until I'm certain 
the Haluk aren't still gunning for me. I'll keep in close touch with you and with Karl 
Nazarian and Adam Stanislawski." 

"Gunter Eckert will also want to confer with you," she said crisply. "Will you let me 
have your phone code?" 

I gave it to her. "Tell Gunter I'll talk to him tomorrow, after the vote. Till then I'm 
incommunicado unless the world falls down. I've got a serious case of combat fatigue, 
and if I want to function tomorrow, I'll have to get some sleep. How are you holding up, 
Evie?" 

Her eyes were focused firmly on mine. "I'm coping ... Asa. The police action in the 
tower has quieted down. Simon has retired to his tower suite. The other members of the 
Board of Directors are still here, helping to normalize the situation in whatever way they 
can. John Ellington will be wire-pulling and whip-cracking all night. I've spent most of 
my time talking to Cousin Zed and Matt Gregoire on Seriphos. Rampart ExSec starships 
are cooperating with Zone Patrol to organize interstellar surveillance over the Haluk 
colonies. Matt suggested we evacuate all civilians from Cravat as a precaution, and I 
agreed." 

"We'll have to set up a heavy blockade around the planet. The best ships we have." 

"They're already on their way. I understand the situation. Now." 

"Evie—" 

"You can trust me, Asa. I fully accept what you told us at the board meeting. I was 
duped and I feel humiliated and angry, but I'm not dysfunctional or in a panic. I'll survive 
this mess and so will Rampart. Just don't expect any warm gushes of sisterly sentiment 
for a while. At the moment, my emotions are on hold. There's too much work to be 
done." 

"I agree. And it sounds like you have things well in hand. One thing I need you to take 
care of personally is the release of the names of all Rampart demiclones to the media. Do 
it in time for the Late Night Toronto newscast on PNN. Karl Nazarian will give the 


information to you right away." 

"May I ask why you want to do this?" 

"Have you been keeping in close touch with Karl?" 

"He sends me hourly progress reports. I've only skimmed the latest one. The Perseus 
situation has occupied most of my attention." 

"The Sam Yamamoto demiclone confessed that around three hundred human DNA 
donors—the real people who were exchanged for Haluk agents—are alive and being held 
prisoner inside Macpherson Tower. They look just like me." 

"Oh, dear God." 

"I want you to tell that to the media, as well as announcing the names of our missing 
people. Demand that every single one of the captives be freed immediately, unharmed. 
Warn the Haluk that dire things will happen if those people are killed or taken away. 
After the newscast, call up the Haluk embassy and formally reiterate your demand. Insist 
that it be forwarded at once to the Servant and the Council of Nine. If you can manage it, 
convince other Concern CEOs to do the same. A lot of those captives aren't Rampart 
people." 

"But the Haluk will deny—" 

"To hell with them! We want to arouse public opinion. Make our citizens receptive to 
the notion of a rescue raid on Macpherson." 

"Asa, you can't!" 

"It'll be a mob of outraged citizen protesters or some such thing," I said. "Nothing to 
do with Rampart. Would you rather have the captives dead?" 

"No, but—" 

"You have to do your part. Those people had their DNA stolen, just as I did. They've 
lost their human appearance and their identities. Alien interlopers have taken their places 
at work, lived in their homes, invaded the lives of their families ... Can I count on you to 
issue the statement, Evie?" 

"Yes," she said, with no more hesitation. 

Her old self. 

"Thank you. There's one final thing you should know about." I told her how Karl had 
been deliberately infected with a debilitating virus by Haluk agents, and my suspicions 
about Simon. "Ask Karl to refer you to the doctor who was able to cure him. It's 
imperative that Simon no longer be treated by Rampart medical people." 

"Those bastards," she hissed. "Those fucking blue bastards! I'll have Pop taken care of 
right now." 

She cut me off. 

I sat on the edge of the bed with my head in my hands, overcome with abruptly 
released tension, trying not to vomit up the coffee I'd drunk. Thanking God that Eve was 
charging ahead with her usual efficiency. That Karl and Hector and the others would 
continue to fight the good fight without me. That I didn't have to return to Toronto. 

Joanna and I could continue on to the tranquil solitude of Kingfisher Lodge. 
Deliberately, I programmed my phone to accept only Cosmic Priority emergency calls. 
Then I lay down to catch a few winks. 

—— 

We arrived at our destination in the Eastern Kenora region of Ontario just after 2115. 
With only starlight for illumination, it was difficult to see any details on the ground, so 


while we were still at cruising altitude I turned on the wide-scan terrain viewer with false 
color enhancement to give Joanna an idea of what lay beneath us. 

It was a beautiful, forbidding landscape of rolling, snow-covered boreal forest, laced 
by rivers and streams and strewn with icebound lakes. To the south, beyond the arterial 
Albany River, lay the vastness of Nipigon Wilderness Park, a rugged outdoor playground 
in summer, nearly uninhabited in winter. Northward and to the east the land flattened into 
dense boggy thickets of black spruce and tamarack that extended without a single track 
all the way to Hudson Bay. To the west was the little town of Central Patricia, where only 
administrative personnel, service and transport people, and traders lived all year round. 

We descended to a little over 2000 meters and hovered in preparation for landing. I 
switched to a close-up view of Kingfisher Lodge itself. The rambling one-story building 
was constructed of sturdy plascrete with an attractive faux-log veneer. It was situated on 
the shore of a moderate-sized body of water called Caddisfly Lake, frozen solid now and 
smoothly covered with snow. Dense stands of balsam fir and white spruce surrounded an 
open compound about three hundred meters wide. I knew that the defensive perimeter 
extended another 400 meters into the forest and the lake. 

Aircraft casually overflying and scanning Kingfisher Lodge would think it was 
deserted, buttoned up for the season. The compound had no ground-based dissimulator, 
external force-field, or any other detectable high-tech defenses. The Kagi emplacements 
and less lethal intruder deterrents were well-camouflaged among the lake rocks and 
brush, as were the multiphase alarm sensors. No interior lights were visible from the air. 
Two of the fieldstone chimneys gave off narrow plumes of vapor, indicating that the 
heating system was functioning, although the thermostat was probably set at a 
temperature level too low for human comfort. 

In addition to the main lodge, which had at least ten bedrooms, the establishment 
included a guard tower disguised as a backwoods food cache, an equipment building, a 
couple of utility structures, and a boat shed. Between the rear outbuildings and the main 
house was a snow-covered circular area about ten meters in diameter, a lidded hopper lift 
that gave access to an underground hangar carved from the solid granite of the Canadian 
Shield. A tunnel led from the hangar to the house. Not part of the original design, hangar 
and tunnel had been added during Dan's year-round confinement, for the convenience of 
the resident staff. 

"Now let me show you how we get inside our rustic fortress," I said to Joanna. "Since 
this is a Macrodur hopper, it doesn't carry any of the lodge's system links, so we'll use 
your new phone." 

She took the instrument out of the inside breast pocket of her suit coat and I showed 
her how to call up the lodge-exterior command menu, deactivate the antiaircraft sensors 
and photon weaponry, and roll back the door covering the elevator platform of the 
underground hangar. 

While I guided the hopper's manual descent, she took care of the landing preparations. 
Then she accessed the lodge-interior menu and tapped more pads to switch on room 
lights, crank up the heat, awaken the housebots so they could deal with our baggage, turn 
on the mattress-warmer in the master suite, and start a couple of hot baths. 

"This is absolutely decadent," she said, laughing. "A backwoods technocottage! Look: 
I can light a fire in something called the master-suite snuggery. Doesn't that sound cozy? 
And the phone even wants to program the stereo. Would you prefer classical or jazz?" 


"Both. How about the Undercurrent and Intermodulation albums with Bill Evans and 
Jim Hall. Then maybe Eine Kleine Nachtmusik." 

"Perfect." 

I reengaged the perimeter defenses. We were hovering now at a little over tree height 
above the underground hangar entry, which was over a hundred meters from the house. I 
turned on the Mitsubishi's emergency landing spot and saw something dash across the 
snowy ground and disappear behind one of the outbuildings. Joanna saw it too. 

"What was that?" she exclaimed. "It looked like a bear." 

"Small one, maybe. Funny. I'd have thought bears would have hibernated by now." 
Something else was odd about the presence of the animal, but I was too maxed-out 
mentally to make sense of it. "Okay, babe, down we go. Hit the pad to roll back the 
hangar elevator door." 

"I thought I already did," she said, frowning. 

"The lid's still closed. Give me the phone and I'll recheck the menu." 

A blinking red telltale. I queried it and the display read 

—— 

HANGAR DOOR IS LOCKED. PLEASE GIVE PASSWORD. 

—— 

Well, damn. The thing wasn't supposed to lock until I fed it my own new password. I 
tried the override and reboot, but the maneuvers didn't succeed. The circular opening 
remained sealed shut. 

"Rats. Could be a computer glitch. Or maybe some jerk forgot to purge the old 
password when the staff left. Well, we'll do things the old-fashioned way for now, and I'll 
check the lift machinery tomorrow." 

I touched down in an open area less than twenty meters from the back of the house. 
The night was windless and pitch-black after I doused the hopper's spotlight, the snow 
depth modest, and the temperature minus-twenty Celsius. 

We spent a few minutes in the cargo bay sorting out clothes and toiletries for our 
immediate needs and stuffing them into a large duffelbag. I pulled a couple of guns out of 
the weapons locker—a holstered Ivanov to discourage wandering bears, and a big ugly 
Talavera-Gerardi 333 actinic blaster with an autotargeting scope, in case the Haluk 
slammed the perimeter defenses and started besieging the house. The rest of the supplies 
and weapons could wait until tomorrow. 

"Why don't we slip into the envirosuits instead of carrying them," I suggested to her. 
"It's pretty cold out there and the snow's deep enough to ruin your nice shoes." 

So we did that, hauling the lightweight coveralls over our regular clothes and donning 
heated overboots and helmets. I strapped on the Ivanov, slung the heavy Tala-G on my 
back, and carried the duffel and a heavy-duty flashlight. Joanna had her purse and a 
plastic grocery sack that contained the makings for a late supper of scrambled eggs, Nova 
Scotia smoked salmon, French bread, fresh Tasmanian strawberries, and Veuve Cliquot 
champagne. 

I used a remote-control gorget hung around my neck to open the hopper's cargo door 
and deploy the steps. Said, "Mush, you huskies! That means you, Professor DeVet." 

She giggled and we disembarked into shin-deep snow. I used the gorget to close up the 
aircraft and turn on its security system and environmental shield. Then we stood side by 
side in an immense dark silence roofed with overarching stars. It was every bit as 


beautiful as Arizona. 

I was about to make a romantic remark when Joanna said, "What's that smell? Could it 
be the bear?" 

A very faint disgusting odor hung in the icy air and penetrated our helmets. It wasn't 
the familiar skunky perfume of bear scats, though; this stench was as offensive as the 
reek of the Y'tata, although composed of different molecules. And I knew what kind of 
creature had produced it. 

"Not a bear, a wolverine. That's what we must have seen moving below the hopper." 

I turned on the flashlight and found a line of prints that made a beeline across the 
compound. We went to look at them. They were nearly as long as a human hand but 
much wider. Big guy. The animal had stepped neatly in its own tracks, placing the hind 
foot where the front foot had pressed down the snow, so that each print seemed to have a 
double row of five stout claws. 

"That's strange," I murmured. "The perimeter defenses let small animals and birds get 
through without getting zapped. But something as large as a wolverine should have 
triggered a painful warning shot from one of the Tazegard units, then a lethal Kagi blast 
if the beast kept on coming. I wonder if part of the perimeter is down?" 

We paused while I unzipped my suit and asked my phone to run a system check. All 
the defensive units were on-line. The obvious explanation eluded my fuddled brain. "I 
can't figure it. But I hope the critter managed to escape the lodge perimeter while we 
were landing. We sure as hell don't want a wolverine loose inside the compound." 

"Why?" 

"They don't hibernate, they're powerful enough to kill a moose, and they like to break 
into wilderness houses and smash things for the fun of it. Then they spray the bits and 
pieces like a giant skunk and... sometimes deface the scene of the crime in other 
unpleasant ways." 

"Good grief! I've never seen a wolverine. Are they very large?" 

"A big specimen can weigh nearly 30 kilos and be more than a meter long. I've only 
seen one in the wild. It had reddish-black fur and looked like a small bear. They're 
notoriously fierce and have the worst temper of any North American wild animal. You 
don't ever want to meet a wolverine." 

"Well, I guess not," said Joanna, looking apprehensively over her shoulder. 

Instead, we were about to meet something a whole lot worse. 

—— 

We had unlocked the lodge's heavily secured back door before leaving the aircraft, so 
we entered easily into a warm, brightly lit mudroom where we were able to take off our 
envirosuits. I hung the hopper gorget and the pistol belt with the Ivanov on a handy peg 
beside my suit. 

Joanna was still wearing the handsome camel-colored wool ensemble and blue silk 
blouse she had chosen for the earlier festivities. With her shining hair pulled back into a 
braided coil, and a discreet string of pearls at her throat, she looked like every randy 
student's dream of a female academic. 

Mine, too. 

I was still clad in Dan's perforated athletic garb, although I had shed the body armor 
right after the media conference. I looked shabby and ridiculous and felt like a sack of 
azure ordure. 


A domestic robot appeared, one of those faceless yard-high jobs with umpteen 
recessed grab-arms and finicky cleaning accessories. It said, "Good evening! May I carry 
your baggage?" 

Someone had pasted a label on it that read: ROBERTA. Clever. Half the domestic bots 
in the Commonwealth were named Roberta. The rest were called Robbie. 

Nevertheless, I gratefully handed over the duffel and the weighty long gun. Joanna 
kept the groceries. 

"May I know your names, sir and madam?" the machine inquired. 

"I hate these things," I muttered. "So pushy. Mom and Pop would never have them in 
the house." 

"Don't hurt its feelings," Joanna admonished me. "It's only trying to do its job." To the 
machine: "I'm Joanna. He's Helly. Please follow us with the things, Roberta. Don't make 
any gratuitous remarks or offer helpful comments unless we ask you to do so." 

"Yes, Joanna." 

The three of us moved into the kitchen, which wouldn't have shamed a small hotel. 
Joanna began opening cabinets and inspecting appliances. 

I said, "I'd love to cook for us, but I don't think I could boil water tonight. Can you 
manage?" 

"Poor baby. Of course I can. Why don't I get our little supper ready now. The lodge 
has a servitron robot. It can bring the food and wine to us when we want it. Meanwhile, 
you go unpack our things and relax. Just tell me how to find our room—" 

"Master suite," I corrected her. "Go down the long hallway until you get to a living 
room the size of the Commonwealth Art Gallery. The suite's on the opposite side of the 
living room, down another hall that leads into the guest-bedroom wing. Remember that 
your bath awaits, madame! I'm going to have one that's lavender-flavored." 

The bot and I trundled off, while Bill Evans and Jim Hall played "Angel Face" on the 
global stereo. 

When my brother Dan was in residence, he had inhabited the master suite—the family 
wanting to make him as comfortable as possible. I'd tell Joanna about Dan's incarceration 
when our stay in the lodge was over. Why infect the ambience for no good reason? 

The decor was luxuriously backwoodsy, with floors of heated stone flags relieved by 
large rag rugs. Walls of dark-glazed pine were decorated with watercolors, limited-
edition photoprints of outdoor scenes and animals, and Indian carvings. Not a stuffed 
critter head in the place. Officially, no one was allowed to hunt out of Kingfisher Lodge. 
All the windows were covered by armored shutters disguised as wood. I decided I'd roll 
up the ones in the bedroom so we could enjoy starlight on snow. If the wolverine came 
around, we'd show him a thing or two. 

With Roberta trailing after, I passed a breakfast room, the main dining room, a game 
room, a huge library, a room devoted to fly-tying paraphernalia and fishing tackle, and a 
full bar with a baby grand piano and other musical instruments. Beyond that was the main 
entry hall, with one set of closed doors opening into the living room and another, heavily 
secured now, leading to a large sunporch that was used only during warm weather. A 
third door led to the service wing. 

I opened the doors to the living room and said, "Follow me, Roberta." 

It kept quiet. No gratuitous conversation. 

The chamber was cavernous, with a high beamed ceiling and a hideous chandelier 


made of discarded caribou antlers that for some reason had not been turned on. Most of 
the room was deeply shadowed. The bot and I went about halfway across the room, to 
where half a dozen leather settees were grouped around a huge fireplace fashioned of 
granite blocks. The only light came from gas flames flickering among faux paper-birch 
logs, and a Tiffany-style bridge lamp standing near a liquor cart full of decanters and 
glassware. The stereo speakers in this room were playing some Germanic opera that 
Joanna certainly had not programmed. 

She hadn't ordered the huge living room fireplace turned on, either, or requested the 
liquor cart. 

"Stand perfectly still," he said, from somewhere behind me and to my right. "It would 
be a great pity if I had to double-dart you before we had an opportunity to talk. We've 
never really had a decent conversation, you and I. It's an appropriate time, don't you 
think? On the brink of events that will stagger the galaxy." 

It was my voice, but overlaid with an intonation that was British or Scottish. No trace 
of a cowboy twang. The theatrical diction was way wrong. 

He stepped out of the shadows holding an Ivanov MS-120, a model that fired darts 
with extra sleepy-juice. Two shots would put an adult human out for twelve hours. I saw 
a tall, husky man with breadcrust-colored hair and a prominent widow's peak. His eyes 
were mean green and his mouth thin-lipped and wide. He wore knife-creased brown 
slacks, a tan wool Pendleton shirt, a cream neck scarf, and Gucci loafers. The duds were 
nice, but hardly my style. 

He said, "Are you armed?" 

"Only the Tala-'G the bot's carrying. Left an Ivanov in the mudroom." 

"Let's make sure. Strip down." 

"Aww—" 

"Do it!" God, he was an ornery-looking devil. Is that what people had seen when they 
looked at me! "Don't bore me with false modesty, laddie. I've watched you floating in the 
tank. And a gratifying sight it was." 

He made me give my phone to the bot and tell him where the remote control for the 
hopper was. As I removed my clothes, shook them out, and then immediately got dressed 
again, my fatigued mind was putting it all together. Too late. 

His own aircraft was inside the locked hangar, secured by his password. Not 
Makebate, which was much too large to fit, but her orbiter gig, with the starship herself 
parked in space, concealed by the powerful dissimulator. 

The wolverine had snuck into the compound when he lowered the lodge defenses for 
landing, then found itself trapped. 

His own "Asahel Frost" personal phone, programmed with virtually all of the data in 
my own instrument, would have given him access to the lodge. And of course he'd been 
here before, during Dan's abduction. He'd know what a superb hideaway it was. 

Two great minds with but a single thought... 

He told the robot to withdraw to the opposite end of the room, after instructing it to 
accept commands only from him. "As for you, lad, please be seated. We'll wait for your 
lovely wife." He indicated a couch opposite the liquor cart. "I was surprised to see her at 
your side during the media conference. Her loyalty was touching." 

"Joanna never had anything to do with you," I said. "Let her go. Do whatever you like 
with me." 


He poured amber liquid from one of the decanters into a cut-glass tumbler and sipped 
it, still standing, without offering me any. The Ivanov was tucked in his belt, its two-shot 
ready-lights glowing. I didn't have a prayer of rushing him, even if I'd been fit. 

"I'll do whatever I like with both of you," he said. "Your wife will be just as valuable a 
negotiating piece as you. When I came here to the lodge, I could conceive of only one 
way to save my neck. Now, thanks to you, I have two alternatives—and the second is 
much more attractive than the first. After tomorrow's Assembly vote—" 

Joanna screamed, "Helly! Oh, God, Helly!" 

She had entered the darkened room and seen him illuminated by the Tiffany lamp and 
the flames. The man with my face. 

I rose from my seat. "No. It's not me." 

She stood transfixed, staring incredulously at the two of us, clutching the strap of her 
shoulder bag as though it were a lifeline. 

"Let me introduce myself, Professor DeVet. My name is Alistair Drummond. I am the 
former chairman and CEO of Galapharma AC. Please come and be seated beside your 
former husband." 

She obeyed, moving like a sleepwalker, unable to take her eyes off him. He had put 
down his drink and taken the Ivanov from his belt, holding it negligently, apparently 
without threat. 

"Please empty your purse onto the coffee table," he said. She complied and he stepped 
closer to inspect the contents—a card wallet, a cosmetics case, a computer notebook, 
several stylomikes, a flat-key folder, a handkerchief, a tiny tin of peppermint Altoids, and 
a phone. He scooped up the computer and the phone and tossed them into the darkness. 

"Roberta! Pick up the two items I dropped. Take them and the other things you're 
carrying to the communication room. Leave the things there and secure the door with my 
password." 

"Yes, Citizen Drummond," said the machine. No facile familiarity with los domesticos 
for our Alistair. "I was instructed by Joanna not to offer helpful comments. Will you 
rescind that order?" 

"Yes," Drummond said. "What d'you have to say?" 

"A servitron containing cold champagne and hot food prepared by Joanna is waiting in 
the kitchen. Shall I summon it?" 

A brilliant smile broke over Drummond's face—my face. I heard Joanna gasp. She'd 
always loved my smile. 

"Yes," Drummond said to the robot, "I'm feeling a bit peckish. Good of you to've 
obliged, Professor." 

Joanna glared at him. 

"Only two place settings have been included," said the robot. "There are adequate 
amounts of food and wine for three. Do you wish an extra place setting?" 

Drummond laughed. "Yes, by all means, Roberta. And now you are dismissed." 

"Damned fink-bot," I growled. "God, I hate those things." 

—— 

So we ate and drank, Joanna and I sitting side by side, Drummond lounging on the 
couch opposite us. He was only slightly inconvenienced by having to keep us covered 
with the stunner while shoveling down eggs and lox and hogging most of the 
strawberries. He was in excellent spirits and seemed eager to talk. Maybe megalomaniacs 


aren't really happy unless they have an audience. 

As Karl had suspected, Drummond knew the game was up as soon as Fake Sam 
informed him that Helly the Haluk had been accepted by the Rampart Board of Directors. 
Even if Sam's demiclone security officers had been able to take control of the boardroom 
and its distinguished occupants, there was no possible way for Sam to salvage the 
situation. Murdering the directors would accomplish nothing. Taking hostages was an 
even more useless option. Realistically, all Sam could have hoped to do was retreat, 
taking the Rampart demi contingent with him. 

Sam had urged Drummond to immediately take refuge in Macpherson Tower. Not 
bloody likely! The Scotsman was crazy but not stupid. The brilliant stratagem he had 
conceived was totally buggered, and in his Fake-Helly demi-clone condition, he was a 
dangerous liability to the aliens. If he entered their embassy, he would never emerge 
alive. Free, he might think of a way to blackmail the Haluk into financing a new life for 
him on some comfortable freesoil world. But where could he hide while waiting for 
events to ripen? 

He remembered Kingfisher Lodge. 

Taking a Rampart hopper there would have meant almost instant capture—either by 
Rampart or by the aliens. Every corporate ground vehicle, aircraft, and starship had a 
monitoring chip in its navigator that sent a coded data stream directly to Fleet Security 
and from there to the bean-counters in Finance. Haluk demiclones were present in both 
departments. 

The only Rampart ship exempt from monitoring was Makebate. I had made sure of 
that. 

Drummond was reluctant to leave Earth for the reasons I had already noted. He was a 
wanted man; Makebate's ultra-luminal fuel-trace was easy to identify, given enough 
people looking for it, as was the ship herself; he had no outplanet hidey-hole ready to 
receive him; and he wanted to stay close to the action in Toronto so he could judge his 
options accurately. Therefore he did the only practical thing—took off in the starship 
using ordinary sublight drive, parked in geosync orbit, then returned to Earth immediately 
in the gig, staying outside the air traffic control network. 

I said, "But you must have suspected that the day would come when the aliens 
wouldn't need you anymore. Didn't you whomp up some sort of insurance policy, the way 
Ollie Schneider did when he was your mole?" 

"No," he said quietly. "It wasn't necessary." 

Oh, boy. Maybe escape hatches and fallback maneuvers were too mundane for hubris-
loaded nutcases: every contretemps a fresh challenge. Even now he wasn't planning a 
getaway. He was mulling over a new scam involving Joanna and me. 

I could hardly wait to find out what it was. 

Joanna said to Drummond, "May I ask you something?" 

That damned smile. "You may ask." He poured the last of the champagne into his own 
glass. 

"How in the world did you escape from the landslide at the Arizona gold mine?" 

"By following rattlesnakes." He threw me a humorous look. "Spare me the obvious 
comment, lad. The mine was riddled with old tunnels and shafts. I had my little penlight, 
which I tied to my head with my scarf, and I had my Lanvin actinic pistol. There was 
water to drink. So I coped." 


He had crept and crawled inside Copper Mountain for nearly three days. A couple of 
times he nearly died in rock-falls. One of them cut him off from returning back the way 
he'd come. (And convinced searchers that he must be lying dead beneath it.) On the third 
day, weak from hunger and with the penlight battery starting to give out, he began 
following what seemed like a moving stream of air, thinking it might lead to an exit. It 
only brought him into a dead-end gallery. 

"At that point I thought I'd had it. There seemed nowhere else to go. I set about 
exploring a jumble of large rocks and suddenly put my boot right into a rattler nest. The 
snakes were rather small, but they were striking at me viciously and I knew they were 
venomous. I shot at them with the Lanvin and fried a few—but the rest fled into a crevice 
among the rocks that I hadn't noticed. Every single snake disappeared. I checked out the 
crevice and discovered the source of the wind. It was rubble-choked crawlway too narrow 
for my body, with sunlight at the end. I blasted rocks until the charge in the Lanvin pistol 
was exhausted, and shifted the pieces with my hands. I got out. I climbed down the 
mountain and followed a dirt track fifteen kilometers to a highway. I hitchhiked to 
Phoenix in a ranch truck and contacted Tyler Baldwin, the demiclone Galapharma 
security chief... and told him about the idea I'd conceived while lost inside the gold mine. 
He took me to the Haluk leaders. I think you can imagine the rest." 

"That's amazing," Joanna said. 

"Do you really think so, Professor?" He'd told the story directly to her, and as he spoke 
his eyes had toured her leisurely from north to south, with several scenic detours that had 
made me grit my teeth in fury. 

Before she could reply, I said, "You got lucky. But the Haluk aren't going to give you 
a third chance at the jackpot, so what's your new game plan? Holding us for ransom?" 

Reluctantly, he shifted his attention from Joanna to me. His voice was quite courteous. 
"A variation on that theme. Following the Assembly vote tomorrow—whichever way it 
goes—you will invite Adam Stanislawski and the seven members of the Rampart Board 
of Directors presently in Toronto to confer with you here at the lodge. The meeting will 
be conducted under conditions of the utmost secrecy, with no other persons present—" 

"I won't do it," I said. 

His gaze flickered to Joanna. "I think you will, given the proper incentive." 

"It'll never work. You can't hold hostages here. The security's not good enough. 
Remember how you grabbed Dan. Others know Joanna and I came to the lodge. They'll 
be suspicious—" 

"We and our guests won't remain here," Drummond said airily. "We'll all be aboard 
Makebate, one of the fastest star-ships in the galaxy. And one that is very well armed. A 
deal will be struck. I guarantee it. If not—" He shrugged, cocked his head and listened to 
the edgy music. "—at least the denouement will be appropriately Wagnerian." 

He gave us a mocking toast and tossed down the last of the champagne. 

Joanna was staring at him with an expresion of objective interest. Her voice had taken 
on a clinical tone. "That's what you really want, isn't it? A dramatic ending. To destroy 
Helly and Adam and the Rampart leadership, because they defeated you twice over." 

Alistair Drummond put down the empty champagne flute and lifted the Ivanov. 
"You're a very lovely woman, Joanna. I'd like you to share my bed tonight." 

"No, thank you," she said politely. "I'm afraid I've just started my period." 

"You lying bitch!" Drummond snapped. 


"No, it's true. Why don't I clear away these supper things into the servitron?" She rose 
from the couch, picked up a china plate, and suddenly scaled it expertly at Drummond 
like a Frisbee, missing his head by only a few centimeters. The plate smashed against the 
granite fireplace. 

Drummond shot her in the breast with the Ivanov. Two darts. She fell back against me. 
"Lying bloody bitch!" he shouted. 

I struggled to shift her body and get at him, but it was useless. He popped me twice in 
the shoulder and I felt the world dissolve into a red-black abyss. 

The last thing I remember was Drummond calling, "Roberta! Clean up!" 

—— 

She was sitting beside me on the edge of the king-sized bed, fully clothed, wiping my 
face with a damp towel. When I made an inarticulate noise she lifted my head and held a 
glass of water to my lips. 

"Careful, dear. Just take small sips." 

I did. My mouth felt like week-old straw in a mule stall. 

She took the water away. "Thank God you're finally awake. We've got to act quickly 
before he comes, and I'm not sure how to work the damned thing." 

"What?" I struggled to sit up. We were in a beautifully appointed bedroom. A clock on 
the nightstand said it was 1333 hours. What was going to be the most memorable day of 
my life was already half gone. 

I stretched my arms, flexed my legs. Except for a sore spot on my shoulder where the 
darts had penetrated, I felt almost good. Maybe I'd send the Ivanov people a testimonial. 

Joanna had left me and gone to a large pottery vase on a low dresser that held an 
ornamental arrangement of dried grasses. She rummaged around in it. "I hid it in here, in 
case he came in before you woke and decided to ... search my clothes." 

She pulled out the new Lucevera 4500 she'd bought in Timmins and handed it to me. 

I said, "Jesus Christ!" 

"It was in my inside jacket pocket all the time. Drummond never thought that I might 
have been carrying two phones. Thank heaven he shot me in the opposite boob." She 
made a face. "Incidentally, the dart wound still hurts like hell. I was afraid that if I used 
the phone to call the Rampart emergency code, the call would register somehow on 
Drummond's own phone. That's why I waited for you to wake up." 

"No, it wouldn't. He and I have separate phone codes. All we share is the computer 
data and system-links. But I'm glad you waited. We'll call Karl instead of arguing with 
ExSec. They're likely to be kinda uptight and antsy at this point in time." 

The armored shutter on one window was open. Outside, fat snowflakes fluttered 
straight down in a winter wonderland. I climbed out of bed and checked the compound. 
The Mitsubishi-Kondo was gone. 

"He's moved the hopper," I said. "He must have put it into the garage out of sight. 
Along with the orbiter gig." 

She said, "The door of our suite is locked and it's not ordinary wood. I think it's made 
of the same armor as the shutters. The glass in the windows looks very thick, too." 

"They're unbreakable and laser-proof. This suite was designed to be ultrasecure. A 
good thing, too. We're going to lock Alistair Drummond out of here, then make some big 
botheration." 

I began tapping pads. 


"What are you doing?" Joanna asked apprehensively. "Won't he know if you access 
the lodge systems?" 

"Not unless he's looking at the phone display. Pray he's got it stowed in his pocket... 
Hah! Gotcha. The original code for the secure-suite lock was deactivated when the lodge 
was shut down. A new one hasn't been installed. That means Drummond must have used 
his simple password to engage the lock. The dumb galoot even gave the password to that 
idiot robot." 

Tap tappety tap tap tap. 

"I don't understand," Joanna said. "Secure suite?" 

"Never mind. Look." I showed her the phone's data-strip. It said: 

—— 

LIST PASSWORDS: GLASGOW 1/1 

—— 

"He didn't encrypt it. Why should he? Anytime we want, we're out of here, babe. But 
not yet. Definitely not yet!" 

I installed a new code for the lock—encrypted, of course—killed the Glasgow access, 
and locked us in. Then I closed the window shutter that Joanna had opened. 

"We're going to make sure our fish doesn't get away," I said. "Then we call for help. 
Crawl under the bed." 

While she gaped at me in stark disbelief, I summoned another menu. This one was for 
Makebate's gig. I explained: "Both Drummond's and my phone have links to the nav-
autopilot system of the starship gig. If I park the gig somewhere, or even leave it inside 
the starship, I can call it to come pick me up—just like a car or a hopper." 

"But the gig is already here," Joanna protested. "In the underground hangar along with 
the Macrodur hopper." 

I took her arm and urged her onto the floor. We both slithered under the bed. "I'm 
going to send the gig home to Makebate. Unfortunately, I'm going to forget to open the 
garage door first." 

"Oh..." 

"The lodge is a very sturdy building," I reassured her. "We should be all right. 
Ready?" 

I pressed the pads that would light up the gig's engines. Did the requisite preflight 
rigmarole. Then I told the orbiter to lift off. The phone began to shriek like a banshee. I 
could hear a tinny computerized voice saying, Danger. Danger. Overhead obstruction 
scanned. Liftoff aborted. Liftoff aborted. 

No doubt Alistair Drummond heard it, too. 

I told the phone, "Override alpha-three-one-one. Go!" 

The concussion did not lift the house off its foundation, nor did it break the armor-
glass windows. The hangar was carved out of bedrock and the major force of the fuel 
blast was directed upward, with a secondary Shockwave rushing along the subterranean 
tunnel, where it severely damaged the deserted staff quarters wing. 

We clung together while bits of demolished machinery rained down on the ceramalloy 
roof like a hailstorm from hell. The bedframe had leaped off the floor and thumped down 
harmlessly. A tall chest of drawers and a bookcase had toppled and scattered things. The 
ceramic bedside lamps had crashed, and so had the vase with the grasses, a couple of 
large framed pictures, and a passel of nameless sundries that had fallen off shelves and 


out of cabinets in the adjacent bathroom. 

"Are you all right?" I asked Joanna. 

"Yes. My God, it was just like a bomb!" 

"Exactly like one." The clinging was very nice. "Did you really start your period?" 

"It's a standard antirape ploy. Men are so squeamish." 

"All the same, I'm glad you threw the plate ... On your feet, babe." 

We crawled out into the mess. I opened the shutters on all three bedroom windows. A 
tall column of smoke swirled from the hangar hole in the middle distance. Not much 
debris was visible; it had sunk out of sight in the deepening snow. 

Next order of business: I called Karl Nazarian's personal code. 

"It's Helly, at the lodge. Alistair Drummond's here. I've destroyed the transportation. 
Send a SWAT team fast. He's armed with a Tala-G and God knows what else. Joanna and 
I are barricaded in Dan's old secure-suite. We'll be okay." 

"I copy your emergency," said the cool old cucumber. "Hold while I talk to ExSec and 
dispatch the team." 

I waited. 

Joanna said, "I hear something at the door." 

Scratching sounds. Then the sharp yelp of a photon gun, one with less power than my 
Tala-G, perhaps a Claus-Gewitter, weapon of choice for serious meat-hunters. Maybe 
Drummond didn't know how to operate the more esoteric combat piece. 

Cheeow cheeow. 

I muttered, "Give it up, sucker. You and your Haluk goons couldn't blast your way in 
here when you came for Dan. You had to torture two guards to death to get the lock-
code." 

Joanna's eyes were wide with horror. "Helly ...?" 

Another photon blast, then silence. 

"I'll explain later," I told her. Karl was back on the phone. 

"The team'll fly out of our Oshawa facility inside of half an hour," he said, "five 
hoppers and thirty personnel. You're looking at a ninety-minute ETA. They'll try to take 
Drummond alive." 

"Goody. Did the Macpherson Tower raid come off?" 

"You haven't heard?" 

"Drummond was waiting for us when we arrived. Joanna and I have been stunned-out 
for over twelve hours." 

"Well, shit. You missed some crazy action. Eve made her pitch to the media and then 
to the Servant, who denied everything in a rebuttal newscast. Couple hours later a 
mysterious armed hopper shot sleepy-gas grenades into every floor in the top half of the 
tower. Toronto Public Safety and ECID were shocked. Shocked." 

I laughed. "Let me guess. The hopper escaped. The cops entered in force to assess 
damage to the embassy and injury to the poor alien occupants. They found the Halukoid 
folks." 

"All safe, all removed to Toronto General Hospital—including your brother Dan, the 
only human being in the place who actually looked like one. There were no demiclones in 
Macpherson. They must have all been evacuated. Of course the media had a field day. 
And the Servant filed a formal protest with Xenoaffairs, claiming the cops had kidnapped 
innocent Haluk, not transformed humans." 


I snorted. "Stick with the Big Lie, right to the edge of the Grand Canyon drop-off." 

"The vote!" Joanna exclaimed. "What about the goddamned vote?" 

"Did you hear the professor's respectful query?" I asked Karl. 

He said, "The Assembly approved the three hundred new Haluk colonies by a margin 
of forty-six votes. The Speaker invited a Citizen Veto Poll. The PlaNet hits are still being 
tabulated and verified, but it looks like the veto won." 

Joanna and I cheered. 

"What's more," Karl said, "there's a groundswell growing for the recall of the 
Delegates who voted for the Haluk colonies. Some Reverse spokespersons are demanding 
top-to-bottom reform of the Assembly to eliminate the influence • of the Hundred 
Concerns. We're living in interesting times, my friend." 

"And here we are," I lamented, "sitting it out on the sidelines with a homicidal 
maniac." 

"I'll be on my way to the lodge myself after I talk to some people. Turn on your 
holovid and catch up on what's happening in the universe. Sit tight till the cavalry arrives, 
and don't do anything stupid." 

"Have I ever?" I asked, and ended the call. 

Joanna was already examining the holo projector in the adjacent snuggery, prodding 
its remote keypad without result. "Nothing but a blank blue field," she mourned. "The 
projector seems all right, so I suppose the antenna was damaged in the explosion." 

The phone buzzed. I looked at the display. The instrument was in intercom mode. 

I said, "Hello, Alistair. Did you enjoy the fireworks?" 

"It's not over," he said softly. 

"Yes, it is. Tell you what. I'll see that you get your real body back before they chain 
you to the bed in the funny farm." 

"I'm leaving now, Frost, but we'll meet again. I doubt that the pleasure will be mutual. 
I intend to have something very special waiting for you—and for Professor DeVet. 
Dream about it." He ended the call. 

Leaving? 

Something medium-large sped past the windows, then reappeared and cut a sharp right 
turn, kicking a rooster tail of snow against the glass. 

Cursing, I ran to check it out. The snowmobile's track led from one of the outbuildings 
to the lodge. Drummond had deliberately buzzed our suite. Now he was heading directly 
toward us at low speed, the twin headlights of the sleek Ski-Doo haloed by floating ice 
crystals. 

The machine was classic yellow-and-black with nice scarlet flashes. The helmeted 
figure in the saddle lifted a hand with two gloved fingers extended. Peace?... V for 
victory? ... Nope. In the British Isles the double-digit salute had another meaning. 

Fuck you. 

An instant later a portable force-field shield enveloped the Doo in a hemisphere of 
golden sparks. Drummond did a 180 and headed straight out onto the frozen lake at 
maximum speed, leaving a huge white cloud of powder snow in his wake. 

I dug in my pocket for the phone, frantically called up the lodge-exterior menu and 
switched on the defenses he had deactivated. Too late. The damned sled was traveling at 
nearly 200 kph and it was already outside the perimeter and gone away. 

I rushed to the door of the suite, spoke the unlock code, and began galloping down the 


hall. Joanna was right behind me as I crossed the living room—where there was 
remarkably little damage from the blast—came into the entry and took a detour into the 
service wing. The com room door was wide open. My Talavera-Gerardi lay centered on a 
small table, neat as a display in a gunshop. 

I swiftly checked the weapon out. It seemed completely undamaged, the barrel was 
clear, and the ready display said FULL CHARGE. I slung the piece over my shoulder. 

Joanna said, "What are you going to do?" 

I pushed past her, heading for the mudroom. Our enviro-suits, helmets, and overboots 
were still there. The Ivanov was gone. I propped the long gun against the wall and began 
to dress. 

"I'll need to take the phone," I said. "You'll have to make a note of the door code so 
you can lock yourself in the secure-suite." 

"But—" 

"Drummond might double back. The exterior defenses are useless because he can 
access them. When I'm gone, get back into the suite and stay there until the SWAT team 
arrives." 

"You can't go after him!" she stormed. "Don't you understand? It's what he wants you 
to do! He's not trying to escape. He'll be waiting for you out there." 

I tinkered with the helmet, establishing the phone link and the system feed with the 
suit and boots that I hadn't bothered with during the short trip from the hopper to the 
lodge. 

"Find something to write the code on, Joanna." 

"Wait," she said tightly. She went into the kitchen and returned with a recipe e-book. 

I read out the alphanumerics, tucked the phone inside my suit, and zipped up. 

She said, "Don't do this, Helly. Not if you love me. Don't go after that man to kill 
him." Her face was very pale, with an odd hectic flush on the cheeks that had nothing to 
do with makeup. She clutched the little book tightly in one hand, holding it at her side 
like a missile ready for throwing. 

"I'll bring him back alive if I can." 

Speaking in a strained whisper: "The SWAT team can do that better than you. Stay 
with me. Please don't leave me alone again." 

"I can't let Drummond get away. If he reaches Central Patricia, he could commandeer 
a fast Park Service hopper and fly down to Thunder Bay Conurb. There's a starship 
shuttle service at the skyport—" 

"He's not trying to get away." Her eyes were bright with moisture. "He left your 
weapon when he could have taken it himself or destroyed it... And I'm sure you'll find an 
operable snow machine waiting out in the equipment building. If Drummond wanted to 
escape, he'd have disabled it. He's playing a game with you, Helly. An insane game!" 

"Will you kiss me goodbye? I love you, Joanna." 

She let me embrace her, passively accepted my hard lips, the alien tongue we'd 
laughed about and enjoyed. When we broke apart her tears had overflowed. 

"Goodbye, Helly," she said, and turned and walked away. 

—— 

Of course Joanna was right about Drummond planning an ambush. I knew that his 
chance of escaping—even as far as Thunder Bay—were infinitesimal. The SWAT team 
would nab his ass as easily as a pack of Ontario timber wolves running down a crippled 


caribou. Unless I got him first. 

And I intended to. 

I'd ignored my wife's good counsel, confirmed her doubts about my character, maybe 
torpedoed any chance of a permanent reconciliation. One part of me was kicking the 
other part and cursing it for a prideful fool. But I couldn't do anything else. 

Cowboys... 

As Joanna had predicted, there was another shiny Ski-Doo waiting for me. Two toys 
were evidently all Rampart had sprung for to entertain the troops, but the Concern hadn't 
stinted on quality. The Formula 12K-XC was the primo back-country trail sled. Its frame 
was scandium alloy—the same stuff that catalyzes trans-ack starship fuel—stronger than 
titanium and lighter than aluminum. To make the machine ride even lighter—and get you 
out of holes when you bogged down—it had inertial stabilizers and optional anti-gravity 
enhancement. Its powerful engine was whisper-quiet. The console was loaded with nifty 
gadgets, including com equipment, a terrain scanner with warm-body capability, global 
positioning, an emergency beacon, and a buddy beacon. Drummond would deactivate the 
latter feature, and so would I. Buddies we weren't. 

Other goodies included a retractable bivouac enclosure that you could shelter in if you 
broke down or got trapped in a blizzard, an independent heater, trail rations, survival kit, 
and first-aid unit. My sled did not have a defensive force-shield. That particular item is 
not among the luxury accessories offered by the Ski-Doo folks. Drummond had either 
brought his own umbrella or swiped one from the Macrodur hopper. The Doo did have a 
swingaway hunter's gun-mount with a weatherproof stretch-sheath that was barely 
adequate to cover my ultramacho Tala-G. I installed the weapon, fired up the engine, and 
eased out of the barn. 

I hadn't been on one of these machines for nearly ten years, but I didn't anticipate 
much difficulty driving. I was in no hurry. Alistair Drummond would wait for me in the 
backwoods arena of his choosing. 

I hoped to arrive at a time, and from a direction, that was not of his choosing. 

The snow was coming down heavier. It was now impossible to see the opposite shore 
of the lake, six klicks away. I checked the scanner to be sure my adversary wasn't lurking 
anywhere in the immediate vicinity—or circling the compound to catch me from the rear. 
Even with a tree-filter, there was a lot of clutter on the screen. It showed only a single 
warm body blip, sans machine accompaniment, moving at a brisk galumph through the 
woods on the other side of the lake. An animal. The data strip said: 

—— 

SPECIES: WOLVERINE-WT: 35.5 KILOS 

—— 

"Go away, beastie," I murmured. "Other game is afoot." 

I called up the positioner map, selected a twenty-kilometer radius, and studied the 
bright terrain-proper display. A number of narrow tracks webbed the forest and bogs 
surrounding the lodge, illegally zapped a couple of years ago by bored security guards 
whose duty it was to nanny my unfortunate brother. 

During warm weather the trails were probably horrific even for iron-butt backpackers 
or anglers—muddy, rough with burned-off stumps, and mosquito-plagued. In winter, 
after the snow attained a reasonable depth, they'd be handy little corridors for 
snowmobilers and game poachers, hence the gun-mount on my sled. Nothing like a rack 


of venison or a moose-muffle to liven up the staff menu. Nothing like a running target to 
sharpen rusty marksmanship skills. 

I expanded to a 50 km overview, then 100 km. The last display included the hamlet of 
Central Patricia ninety klicks to the west. A single trail, beginning at the far side of Cad-
disfly Lake, twisted and twined and ended up there. I wondered briefly what attractions 
the lonely men had found in the tiny outpost. A bar with live music and friendly local 
ladies? Hey, in their shoes it would have appealed to me. 

I highlighted the C-Pat Trail, then returned to the large-scale map and called up a 
holographic topo display. To check for high ground overlooking that trail—preferably not 
too far away from the lodge. 

There wasn't much. The most likely—very nearly the only!—ambush spot I could find 
was a sparsely wooded granite ridge only 29 meters above the surrounding terrain. It was 
situated about nine klicks from the western lakeshore. The ridge was relatively steep and 
treeless on the southern side, above the trail, and sloped gently to the north, where the 
forest was thicker. 

The stretch of the C-Pat Trail next to the ridge was fairly wide and straight, inviting a 
sledder to travel at speed. A couple of klicks west of the high ground, a branch trail came 
in on the right. This was a much narrower and more convoluted path leading back to the 
lake, paralleling a short creek that drained a pond. Its termination was about five 
kilometers north of the C-Pat trailhead. 

If I were Alistair Drummond, I'd drive across the lake and go west on the C-Pat past 
Granite Ridge to the Creek Trail junction. Turn right. Trend back eastward a klick or two 
behind the ridge. Leave the trail and drive my sled ever so carefully south, upslope 
through patchy trees and rocks to the overlook. 

Hunker in. Wait for Helly to come bombing along the C-Pat down yonder, gung ho to 
catch up with the fleeing miscreant. Pot him like a ptarmigan. 

Unless the intended victim entered the forest on Creek Trail instead, and snuck up 
behind the sniper. 

—— 

I sped diagonally across the lake. The ice was freeway flat and the scanner came up 
dead empty. From the shore the Creek trailhead was almost invisible, clogged with brush 
and a tangle of downed birch saplings. I punched the anti-gravity and hopped over them, 
then started along a winding path that was barely wide enough for a single machine. The 
air temperature was minus-five. My snow-depth indicator read 34 cm. Ten of that was 
fresh powder, and there'd be lots more before long. 

Nearly an hour had passed since I'd spoken to Karl Nazarian. The SWAT team would 
be arriving soon. I cranked the throttle and drove as fast as I dared. The engine was a 
tiger-purr, muffled by the falling white stuff. 

Twenty minutes later I was behind Granite Ridge. The irregular ground upslope 
showed no trace of a warm body. I could only presume he was on the other side of the 
crest, where broken rock formed a natural redoubt above the C-Pat. If I went farther 
along the Creek Trail, looking for his sled tracks to verify that he had, in fact, chosen this 
spot for the ambush, there was a chance he might scan me or hear me. I opted to climb 
the ridge on foot. The scope of rny Tala-G had a thermal targeter three times more 
sensitive than that of a Ski-Doo—or a Claus-Gewitter blaster. 

I called up a compass on my visor display and took a rough bearing on my objective. 


The vantage point was about a mile and a quarter southwest. There would be adequate 
cover until I reached the ridge top, where only small clumps of trees had found a footing 
in the frost-fractured granite. 

My boots had a nifty feature: deployable miniature bear-paw snowshoe webs. I spread 
them and started mushing. The blood singing in my ears was the only other sound in the 
winter fastness. I still didn't have my old stamina, but I made the climb without too much 
difficulty in the relatively shallow snow, doing a sweep with the scope every dozen 
meters, finding nothing warm—and no shield ionization signature, either. 

Just below the ridge crest, sheltered by a group of jack pines, I rested and turned off 
the heating system of my envirosuit. Every little erg counts. Then I began to creep toward 
the overlook, which I estimated was about 200 meters away, snaking through tall snow-
covered rocks, taking advantage of every bit of cover, sighting through the gun scope 
every other minute, praying that Drummond was up here and that he was concentrating 
his attention on the C-Pat Trail, not scanning the ridge to his left. 

In the scope, two blips of warm. 

I flattened, sinking into the snow behind a white-capped chunk of granite the size of a 
car. Changed the scope mode to amplification, peeked out. 

I saw a crouching figure holding a long gun at the ready. His Ski-Doo waited close by, 
slightly downslope among the trees. No force-field hemisphere, of course. You can't 
shoot a blaster through a simple portable shield. 

I pulled off my right mitten so I could operate the trigger and targeted Alistair 
Drummond, the man wearing my body. Range, 156.2 meters. 

Don't do this, Hetty. Not if you love me. Don't go after that man to kill him. 

I'll bring him back alive if I can. 

Rats. 

I switched the gun to manual fire and blasted a pine snag six meters away from him. 
He fired down at the C-Pat Trail, then sent another wild shot to his right, decapitating a 
small balsam fir. He hadn't found me with his scope and the snow made it impossible for 
him to judge my position. 

I waited. Willing him to do it. 

He fired again, coming nowhere near me, then made a dash for his snowmobile. 
Boarded, flicked on the shield. Safe from my photon weapon beneath his sparkling dome, 
he started his machine and headed downhill toward Creek Trail, weaving feather-light 
through the spindly pines. He'd turned on the antigravity enhancer to maximize his speed 
on the flurry powder. 

I surged to my feet, clambered on top of the rock, and began to mow down the trees 
ahead of him, blasting the trunks near the base so they dropped like jackstraws. Some 
bounced harmlessly off the force-field, others fell to either side as I continued to aim in 
front of the scuttling, turtle-shaped mass of golden sparks. 

He had nearly dropped below my line of fire when I nailed him. A perfectly felled 
pine came down right across his path and the sled hit it head-on. The force-field projector 
cut out as the power died. I watched the yellow-and-black machine do a nose-flip right 
over the log and begin rolling down the steepening slope. Drummond was still in the 
saddle. 

The Ski-Doo disappeared in the snow. I hopped off the rock and began floundering 
after it. I found him a few minutes later, under the broken and twisted machine. It had 


fetched up against a tree. Both of his legs were grotesquely entangled in the skid-frame. 
There was not much blood. 

I dug the snow away from his head and opened his visor and looked into my own face, 
twisted in agony. Alistair Drummond was fully conscious. 

He said, "Damn you. Damn you." 

"There's no way I can winch this thing off without hurting you," I told him. "I'll have 
to go back to the lodge and find a cutting tool." 

"Why didn't you shoot me on the ridge?" he asked. 

"I killed myself once in Macpherson Tower. Once is enough." 

The first-aid unit and survival kit were intact. I wrapped the parts of his body that I 
could reach in mylar foil blankets. Did my best to inspect his shattered legs without 
removing the remnants of his envirosuit. It was still producing warmth. 

"There's bound to be a medic in the Rampart SWAT team coming up from Toronto. It 
should arrive soon. I'll put up the survival tent to keep the snow off you. Would you like 
a drink of water?" 

"Go to hell." 

He turned his head away and didn't say anything else. His eyes were closed. There was 
a pulse in his neck, so I figured he'd either fainted or gone into shock. 

Time to move along. I flicked the emergency beacon, erected the tent, and turned on 
its heater. Then I hiked back down Creek Trail to my own machine and returned to the 
lodge. 

—— 

Joanna and I were still trying to find a cutting torch in the shambles of the workroom, 
which was in the damaged staff wing, when five blue Rampart ExSec hoppers landed in 
the compound. The team leader was an Amazonian black woman named Captain Sarah 
Marcus. 

She had the medical personnel and the equipment necessary to free and evacuate 
Drummond. She had the good sense not to argue when I said I was going along. 

Two aircraft landed in the creek bed, the only open space available. Captain Marcus 
supervised loading the gear on AG totes, but I was the one who led the way as we 
snowshoed through the cold white woods to the place where Alistair Drummond awaited 
rescue. 

"What the hell is that stink?" Marcus said. 

I said, "Oh, shit," knowing. 

We found the tent torn to bits and bloody snow trampled by clawed feet and a body 
with its throat torn out, defiled with foul-smelling musk. 

"There it is, Cap!" one of the troops cried, whipping out his Kagi sidearm and taking 
aim. "Looks like a goddamn bear!" 

I knocked his gun arm up and the blast went harmlessly into the trees. A bulky dark 
form bounded out from a tumble of rocks and dashed downhill with surprising speed. In a 
moment it had vanished into the storm. 

"Not a bear," I said. "A wolverine. Leave it alone." 

Captain Marcus said, "It killed this man. We can scope it out and burn it later, when 
we're airborne." 

"No," I told her firmly. "We'll let the animal be. It's a wild thing. It acts naturally, 
following its own rules. It has a right to do so. Do you understand?" 


"Yes." She turned her back on me and began giving orders to the others, and I tramped 
away downhill into the clean white falling snow. 


Epilogue 

 

The scout ship that Adam Stanislawski had sent to Amenti, in the Sagittarius Whorl, 
reported that the asteroid was the home base of an estimated two hundred Haluk corsairs. 
Shortly after the incident at the Haluk embassy was reported by the media, the Macrodur 
chairman dispatched a fleet of Concern cruisers to clean out the pirate nest. 

Following the destruction of their starships, the Haluk declared war on the 
Commonwealth of Human Worlds. 

A force of consisting of eighty heavy warships and 160 light starfighters lifted off 
from Haluk colonial planets at the tip of the Perseus Spur and headed for Seriphos, 
Rampart's local headquarters. The attackers were intercepted in deep space by Rampart 
starships and Zone Patrol. Eventually they were annihilated, although the outnumbered 
defenders suffered heavy casualties. Seriphos itself was left unscathed. 

Immediately after this engagement, a second enemy fleet of equal size left the Haluk 
worlds and began to encircle Cravat, sole source of the genen vector PD32:C2. Rampart 
forces had been siphoned away from Cravat to defend Seriphos, and the tide of battle 
began to turn toward the aliens. 

At the same time, Rampart's powerful Fleet Scanner Satellite at Tyrins detected nearly 
four thousand alien vessels en route from the Haluk Cluster to the Perseus Spur. 

I consulted with the Rampart Board of Directors, then ordered the Rampart defenders 
to incinerate every landmass on Cravat with antimatter bombs. 

Virtually every armed Concern and Commonwealth star-ship in the galaxy, including 
that of Captain Guillermo Bermudez Obregon, based on Kedge-Lockaby, was mobilized 
to defend the Milky Way Galaxy. I drove Makebate. 

After sixty-one days of righting in intergalactic space outside the Perseus Spur, the 
aliens surrendered. 

Mimo, who was once again in excellent health, personally accounted for eighty-four 
ship-kills. He threw a celebratory luau at his Eyebrow Cay home, and some three dozen 
lowlife starship commanders who had distinguished themselves in the late conflict 
attended. 

So did I. I was still blue, but no one minded. I had popped 166 of the bastards. 

—— 

The defeated Haluk deposed the Servant of Servants and imprisoned him in a 
monastery of Anointed Elders, where he was to undergo corrective meditation for the rest 
of his life. 

The surrender agreement was eyeballed by Locutor Ru Kamik and the Council of 
Nine. In it they abjectly disavowed the Grand Design and begged the Human 
Commonwealth to have mercy on the Haluk people. 

Magnanimous in victory, the Commonwealth agreed to sponsor a massive research 
program—contracted out to Rampart Concern—synthesizing the vector virus PD32:C2. 
If, after five years, the aliens demonstrated that they embraced peace and abandoned the 
pernicious philosophy of uncontrolled population growth, the vector manufacturing 
process would be made available to them, gratis. Human inspection teams and family-
planning counselors were to be welcomed in the Haluk Cluster, as well as the Haluk 
colonial worlds. Normal trade relations would be reestablished. If all went well during 
the five-year period, the Commonwealth would consider systematically granting limited 


numbers of Milky Way planets to the Haluk, until their population pressures eased. 

Until then they were stuck with allomorphy and the worlds they already inhabited. 

The flawed alloeradication therapy developed by the late Emily Blake Konigsberg 
would be studied by human experts during the interim, and tweaked to eliminate the 
relapse factor. Fortunately, treated Haluk individuals who had reverted to the 
testudomorph state did emerge from their chrysalids as healthy allomorphic graciles. 

In another condition of the surrender, the Haluk agreed to round up all Haluk-human 
demiclones, toss them into dystasis tanks, and change them back into normal Haluk. A 
few genetic transforms, including the woman known as Dolores da Gama, eluded the 
dragnet and are said to be blissfully enjoying the human condition on obscure freesoil 
worlds. 

Nearly ten thousand human DNA donors were rescued from the Haluk colonies, in 
addition to the higher-status individuals imprisoned in Macpherson Tower. Some of the 
former had floated for years, and had had five or six alien copies made of themselves. 
After memory reprogramming, over half of the donors regained their mental health, 
found employment, and resumed their interrupted personal lives. The others were cared 
for by the Commonwealth at Haluk expense. 

The Haluk promised to eschew mining transactinides with convict slave labor. In 
another CHW-sponsored project—contracted out to Sheltok Concern—human mining 
engineers traveled to the Haluk Cluster to instruct the aliens in more civilized technology. 
The Haluk were apt pupils. In time Sheltok would find itself purchasing more efficient 
machinery for the Sagittarian mines, designed by Haluk—just as Bodascon Concern 
would adopt certain Haluk starship innovations. 

The aliens were hardware hotshots but abysmally unskilled in biotechnology and 
computer science. The new trade treaty allowed them to buy all the human goods they 
wanted, with the exception of certain armaments. 

Julian May 375 

Enormous quantities of Macrodur computers were sold to the Haluk. The 
manufacturers of ticklesuits and Japanese kimonos also did a roaring business. 

—— 

Meanwhile, back on the planet Earth, a political upheaval was in full swing. 

Many Conservative Delegates were recalled and Reversionist candidates elected to 
take their places. Geraldo Gonzalez matured into a statesman of major stature. Together 
with Efrem Sontag, he sponsored Assembly bills that eventually eliminated the 
longstanding domination of CHW politics by the Hundred Concerns. 

Pocket Delegates disappeared into oblivion. Syndics found other jobs. Corporation 
finks were immediately purged from the Secretariat for Xenoaffairs, the Interstellar 
Commerce Secretariat, and Zone Patrol. Over the next decade, legislation was enacted 
that reformed many areas of the human governmental structure. 

The Conlegius statutes, which had given Concerns far-ranging independent police 
powers, were abolished. At the suggestion of Delegate Sontag, Karl Nazarian was 
appointed to a new CCID task force overseeing Concern security reorganization. 

The Commonwealth Correction System was also revamped, eliminating the penalty of 
disenfranchisement except for capital crimes. Throwaways were invited to reapply for 
citizenship and carefully screened. The scandal-ridden Coventry penitentiaries were 
closed down. 


Corporate ownership of the stars would persist for a long time, as the Assembly slowly 
whittled away at the entrenched hegemony of Big Business and enacted new tax 
measures to finance the reforms. Rome wasn't built in a day, and neither was a galactic 
democracy. 

Nonstargoing Insap races were granted just wages and given educational options. 
They did not become corporate stakeholders and share in the profits of their exploited 

worlds. Their consciousness raised, some of the natives became predictably restless. 
But the majority didn't give a damn, so long as the human invaders brought in plenty of 
trade goods. 

Beer was an especially big hit among carbon-based life-forms. 

—— 

After the brief Haluk War, I spent time in dystasis and emerged with my previous 
body, buffed up a little here and there. Joanna was present for my rollout, and so were 
Simon—healthy as a horse—and Eve and Beth and even Cousin Zed. Karl Nazarian and 
his Over-the-Hill Gang were on hand, along with Mimo and my old comrades Ivor 
Jenkins and Ildiko Szabo. 

Daniel Frost pleaded a previous engagement with his psychotherapist. He now lived 
quietly with his wife in a secure house in the Ontario Cottage Country and steadfastly 
denied that he had done anything wrong. 

Fulfilling my promise to Simon, I now serve as a part-time Rampart executive. Most 
of my work is tedious troubleshooting. I have moments when I sincerely wish I were a 
beach bum again. 

I did manage to implement Reversionist principles on many of the planets in the 
Perseus Spur, but the ex-Galapharma worlds in the Orion Arm fought my radical notions 
tooth and nail. Their reform may have to wait until the Commonwealth Assembly does 
the job for me. 

I myself have no desire to seek public office, although I still give generous donations 
to the Reversionists. A political cowboy is a sorry thing. 

One of the charitable foundations that I manage is dedicated to alleviating the lot of 
the denizens of the Dark Path. Sadly, numbers of them want nothing more than to 
continue on exactly as before; the trogs are always with us. A sizable majority have been 
assisted by my foundation to make new lives under one sun or another. 

Mama Fanchon Labrecque became head of the Visiting Practitioner Service of Kedge-
Lockaby's new Katje Vander-post Memorial Hospital. 

Mohammed al-Wazan is in medical school and hopes someday to join Mama. The 
sadistic executive creep who used him as a boy-toy was mysteriously shanghaied and is 
now a permanent maroony, in charge of toilet-cubicle maintenance in the asteroid 
Phlegethon. 

Santa Claus still lives beneath Toronto. If there is profound symbolism there, I haven't 
been able to figure it out. 

The rest of the Grange Place Tribe have returned to their families and are doing as 
well as can be expected. 

Professor Joanna DeVet teaches political science at Commonwealth University for 
three terms each year. Her book was a popular smash and provoked unseemly jealousy 
among certain of her academic colleagues, even though she donated the proceeds to 
charity. 


We were remarried a week after I emerged from the tank. We have a house in the 
Kawartha Lakes region and an apartment in Rampart Tower. Neither one has domestic 
robots. 

We vacation at the Sky Ranch and on Kedge-Lockaby. She loves my yellow 
submarine. I love the way she sits a horse. 

Joanna is still trying to understand me, and claims that the natural history of the 
wolverine offers significant insights into my character. I call that piffle. 

She has also tells me that she sometimes misses Helly the Haluk. 

I don't. 


