ORION ARM 

The Rampart Worlds: Book 2 

 

Julian May 

 

 

v3.0 - Fixed broken paragraphs, garbled text, formatting; by peragwinn 2004-Oct-11 

 

A Del Rey® Book 

THE BALLANTINE PUBLISHING GROUP 

NEW YORK 


By Julian May 

Published by The Ballantine Publishing Group: 

 

The Saga of Pliocene Exile 

Volume I: The Many-Colored Land 

Volume II: The Golden Tore 

Volume III: TheNonborn King 

Volume IV: The Adversary 

 

Intervention 

Volume I: The Surveillance 

Volume II: The Metaconcert 

 

The Galactic Milieu Trilogy 

Volume I: Jack the Bodiless 

Volume II: Diamond Mask 

Volume III: Magnificat 

 

The Rampart Worlds 

Volume I: Perseus Spur 

Volume II: Orion Arm 

 

Sky Trillium 

 

Books published by The Ballantine Publishing Group are available at quantity discounts on bulk purchases for 
premium, educational, fund-raising, and special sales use. For details, please call 1-800-733-3000. 


Sale of this book without a front cover may be unauthorized. If this book is coverless, it may have been reported to the 
publisher as "unsold or destroyed" and neither the author nor the publisher may have received payment for it. 

 

 

A Del Rey® Book 

Published by The Ballantine Publishing Group 

Copyright © 1999 by Starykon Productions, Inc. 

 

All rights reserved under International and Pan-American Copyright Conventions. Published in the United States by 
The Ballantine Publishing Group, a division of Random House, Inc., New York, and simultaneously in Canada by 
Random House of Canada Limited, Toronto. Originally published in Great Britain by Voyager, an imprint of 
HarperCollins Publishers, London, in 1999. 

 

Del Rey is a registered trademark and the Del Rey colophon is a trademark of Random House, Inc. 

 

www.randomhouse.com/delrey/ 

 

Library of Congress Catalog Card Number: 99-91747 

 

ISBN 0-345-39519-0 

 

Manufactured in the United States of America 

 

First American Edition: April 1999 

 

10 987654321 


Prologue 

 

His Daimler-Tori hoppercraft hurtles down from the ionosphere on its programmed 
course. The time is 0247 hours and the appointment with Alistair Drummond is at 0330. 
Below, the land is hidden by a thick layer of clouds, but the ship's ground display shows 
the enormous expanse of the capital conurbation and its satellite residential communities, 
spread along the entire northern shore of Lake Ontario. 

The hopper joins a sparse swarm of other light aircraft hovering within a holding 
pattern at nine thousand meters. The ship's navigation unit says: "Now arriving Toronto 
Conurb ATZ. Please supply next routing." 

He has dozed fitfully most of the way from the Sky Ranch in Arizona, exhausted by 
the stress of the general board meeting and fearful of the challenge that lies ahead. 
Rousing with a muttered curse, he removes the templets of the dream machine and says: 
"Wait." 

The navigator acknowledges. 

He leaves the flight deck and enters the Daimler's tiny lavatory. After relieving 
himself, he fumbles at the convenience console and calls up shave-gel, mouth rinse, an 
astringent towel, and a mild stimulant. As he completes the grooming ritual and the drug 
takes hold, his reflection in the mirror changes. The features lose the blotched puffiness 
of fatigue, becoming keen and judicial, and the sunken, haunted eyes take on a 
counterfeit sparkle. He combs his hair low on his forehead and to the side, concealing the 
prominent widow's peak that characterizes so many members of his famous family. 

Returning to the flight deck, he opens a locker, removes a hooded featherweight soft-
armor jacket with a one-way visor and puts it on over the tropical business suit he had 
worn to the board meeting. The personal weaponry can wait until he's on the ground. 

He addresses the ship's navigator again. "Go to Blue Disenfranchised Persons 
Reserve. Prep for manual touchdown at junction of Mamertine and Borstal streets." 

"Warning. This area is outside the jurisdiction of Toronto Conurb Public Safety-" 

"Cancel advisory." 

"Warning: Touchdown in a DPR is at your own risk. No aid units will respond to 
emergency summons—" 

"Cancel." 

"Warning. Touchdown in a DPR will render all vehicle insurance coverage null and 
void. The following precautions are— " 

"Cancel all advisories and go." 

"Air access to Blue DPR visitor landing sites requires barrier override code. Please 
enter code." 

His fingers tremble only slightly as he plugs in the data-dime furnished by 
Galapharma's Arizona covert op. The navigator blinks in approval. 

"Confirmed. En route." 

The hoppercraft drops through the cloud deck to an altitude of less than five hundred 
meters. It comes in from the south, over the dead-black lake. Rain is falling heavily, 
blurring the pinpricks of colored light delineating the cityscape below. Only the Toronto 
core and its adjacent maze of islands to the east are clearly visible, shielded in the 
tenuous golden glitter of a Class One force-umbrella nearly forty kilometers in diameter. 
Protected from the weather, handsome government buildings and the proud bright 


crystalline towers of the Hundred Concerns defy the stormy summer night. 

The panorama is gorgeous, but he is in no mood to appreciate it. He calls up a triple-
shot espresso with a tot of cognac and sips it, speaking the magic words aloud: "Calm. 
Competence. Courage." 

He possesses all three qualities in abundance, and they will carry him through the 
upcoming ordeal. However, since he is the bearer of disappointing news, he rehearses the 
spin angle he has calculated will be most effective with Alistair Drum-mond. 
Galapharma's CEO will probably be furious at the setback, but Drummond is no fool, and 
he'll have to concede that the Rampart takeover can be leveraged only with inside 
assistance. 

His assistance. 

There is really nothing for him to be afraid of. 

Coventry Blue is finally gone, along with the other wretched excesses that were 
tolerated by a compliant CHW government under the corrupt thumb of galactic Big 
Business. Nowadays, white-collar criminals—like him—get their comeuppance in a more 
humane, if less colorful, manner. 

Too bad. 

He deserved Coventry Blue if anyone did, the treacherous bastard. But I suppose I'm 
prejudiced... 

Before the Haluk War, the penal institution that combined the worst aspects of an 
ancient Soviet gulag with anything-goes 2050-vintage Las Vegas was situated on the 
western outskirts of Toronto. It was the largest and most flagrantly mismanaged 
Disenfranchised Persons Reserve in the Commonwealth. Nobody seems to know how the 
dark carnival aspect first invaded this particular Coventry, but it undoubtedly persisted 
because the Hundred Concerns found it useful as a tangible deterrent to corporate 
disloyalty. Among other things. 

The DPRs were originally designed as walled, self-contained penitentiary villages, 
providing their lifer inmates with an environment that was supposed to allow them a 
limited amount of independence and dignity. Self-government by the highly educated 
felons was one of the prime organizing principles, and in most of the Coventries the 
system worked well enough. Guards kept order, but under the original charter, they 
operated more like a small-town police force than like jailers. The convict population 
lived in apartments instead of cells. They didn't have to wear uniforms. There was no 
onerous regimentation. The prisoners had ample opportunity for gainful employment and 
recreation, and according to regulations, they were allowed visitors once a week. Life in a 
conventional Disenfranchised Persons Reserve wasn't all peaches and cream, but it wasn't 
a lunatic jamboree of Neronian depravity, either. 

The same couldn't be said about Coventry Blue. 

Most of the luckless felons sentenced to permanent residence there (some having 
been apprehended by me, when 1 was an enforcement agent for the Interstellar 
Commerce Secretariat) would have sold their souls to be elsewhere. At the same time, 
naughty-minded free citizens on the Outside were paying good money to get into the 
damned place! 

Blue's transient clientele came from all over the home world and from adjacent 
planets of the Orion Arm. The goal: to party down and dirty. Libertine tourists romping 
along the notorious Blue Strip could count on rubbing elbows— if nothing else—with 


distinguished local citizens, many of them members of the capital's political and 
corporate upper-crust who might deplore the place's wickedness in the public forum but 
didn't hesitate to indulge illicit Blue itches when the need arose. To the more vicious 
variety of well-heeled thrillseeker, the sort who could afford the stiff bribe for the night 
entry code and the outrageous fees charged for the unique attractions, Coventry Blue was 
the carnal cruise destination of choice: zero-K cool, the ultimate hoot, where vile 
amusements weren't bloodless virtual reality, but shockingly, deliciously, perilously 
actual. 

And legal, within the walls. After all, the inmate purveyors were Thrown Away, 
stripped of citizenship, nonpersons. In law, not even the probationary disenfranchised—
such as I was, in those days—had any civil rights. Throwaways condemned to Coventry 
Blue were the lowest of the low, officers and middle management employees who had 
violated important statutes of their Interstellar Corporation or Amalgamated Concern, 
threatening the very economic foundation of the Commonwealth of Human Worlds. 

A certain percentage of Blue inmate newcomers— especially naifs who had 
disbelieved the dire rumors they'd heard about the place—committed suicide when they 
realized that the prison was under the absolute control of exploitative convict gangs; but 
the majority just caved in to the inevitable and decided to go with the flow, accepting 
employment in the illegal enterprises operated by inmate kingpins. If life became too 
unbearable, oblivion was available in the form of cheap drugs, buzzheadmg, or old-
fashioned alcohol that could be purchased with the monthly dole if one skimped on 
frivolities such as food and clothing. 

Religious leaders, left-wing media pundits, Reversionists, and other powerless moral 
guardians of the time called Coventry Blue a pervert's playground, a stinking sore on the 
backside of the capital conurbation, the epitome of everything that was rotten in the 
Commonwealth of Human Worlds during those bad old days of yesteryear. Right-
thinking citizens were gratified when Blue was finally shut down during the sweeping 
reforms that followed the war and the downfall of the Hundred Concerns. 

Lots of wrong-thinkers were relieved, too. Including him. 

But I still get a smidgen of wicked satisfaction imagining how it must have been on 
that night of January 18, 2233, when he visited the infamous den of iniquity—under 
strong protest, of course. 

He prided himself in knowing almost nothing about Coventry Blue. Its sordid 
activities went unreported by the legitimate media, and he would never have dreamed of 
entering its restricted-access smutsite on the PlaNet. He wasn't interested in that sort of 
thing. 

The quest for power was his besetting sin, and in pursuit of it he had conspired to 
betray his own family's Starcorp to a predatory business rival, allying himself with a 
megalomaniac who might or might not decide to feed him to the wolves when his 
usefulness was over. 

Corruptor and corruptee had conferred face-to-face only once before, at the very 
beginning of Galapharma's bid to take over Rampart Starcorp. Since then the two men 
had communicated via intermediaries, covert ops belonging to the big Concern's security 
organization who would mysteriously appear to request progress reports or deliver 
instructions. He had no idea why Gala's capricious CEO had elected to set up this 
meeting in Coventry Blue instead of in a more seemly venue. 


Unless he'd done it for educational purposes. 

So here goes our corporate antihero, an upright, uptight respected executive of 
Rampart, on a quickie tour of hell. His perilous game is approaching its climax. If he 
wins, he'll get everything he's ever wanted. If he loses, he could come to Coventry Blue 
to stay... for the rest of his life. 

The hoppercraft flies slowly at a low altitude, reined in by the computers of Traffic 
Control. Even in the wee hours the Shore Freeway and Queen Elizabeth Way are 
crowded with cars and transit vehicles flowing in orderly streams to and from the radiant 
central umbrella. Luminosity reflects from low-hanging clouds, revealing the residential 
districts and industrial parks of Mississauga and Etobicoke, their wet streets gleaming 
beneath neatly spaced streetlamps. 

To the north is a less tidy enclave of about nine thousand acres. Its irregular perimeter 
is outlined by bright sapphire lights that surmount a ten-meter-high wall topped by razor-
wire and Kagi guns on pivoting stanchions. At the eastern side of the complex is a 
gatehouse and security checkpoint. A single garishly illuminated thoroughfare—Peel 
Road, a.k.a. the Blue Strip—leads from the gate into Coventry's interior. 

The main drag of the prison village is solidly packed with upscale cars. The byways, 
almost deserted, have meager streetlighting or none at all. There are no trees or other 
ornamental vegetation anywhere. Except for the bizarre come-hither architecture of the 
clip joints, pusher palaces, and bordellos along the Strip, the structures of Coventry are 
built of drab plascrete—dismal apartment blocks and jerry-built flops for the more 
peaceable Throwaways, lockups and warehouse facilities for the wig-outs and immobile 
sickies, un-sanctioned fortified town houses inhabited by the convict elite who exploit 
their lesser fellows, and a guard barracks near the prison entrance. Smaller boxy units 
accommodate inmate services, tacky small shops and take-out food joints, storefront 
churches and charitable institutions, and the innumerable enterprises of Blue's illegal 
economy. Windows of the off-Strip buildings are mostly dark, in obedience to the 
selectively enforced midnight curfew regulations. In a few, oleum-flame lanterns and 
even candles cast a wan yellowish glow. Burnt-out ruins and heaps of rubble occupy 
some of the weedy open areas. Others serve as parking accommodation for visiting 
hoppercraft or cars and have bonfires burning to signal available space. 

His Daimler reaches its destination and hovers until he takes over the controls. 
Borstal Street runs parallel to the Blue Strip. Its intersection with Mamertine is at the 
western end of the penal complex, nearly five kilometers from the gate. He descends 
toward the parking lot designated by Alis-tair Drummond. 

The Daimler's terrain-scan monitor shows a level area crowded with at least sixty 
expensive hoppers, incongruous amidst the squalid surroundings. Their security shields 
throb faintly crimson in the rain, warning that intruders will be shocked into insensibility. 
Only a handful of the private aircraft show visible registration alphanumerics on the roof. 
The rest have ID illegally obscured for the duration of their stay in Coventry. 

For a brief moment he hesitates. (Calm! Competence! Courage!) Then he lands in a 
space as near to the lot's bonfire as possible. A parking attendant comes out of a shanty 
and slowly approaches over the muddy ground. The figure waits at a safe distance for 
him to emerge. 

He buckles on twin holsters, checks the load in his Ivanov stun-gun and the charge 
indicator on the Kagi photon pistol. He programs the remote control gorget for the hopper 


and locks it around his neck, zips the armor jacket and pulls down the visor. He stuffs his 
wrist wallet with cash and a single blind draft credit card, then pulls on zapper gloves. 

The Throwaway attendant stands motionless as he climbs out and touches his gorget 
to lock the aircraft and engage the security system. He can hear the noise of the Strip a 
block away: high-db rock music with yelping electronic toms and seismic bass, obbligato 
horn honks from the traffic jam, a volley of mystifying animalian howls. Underlying it all 
is the roar of carousing humans. 

"Morning, guv," says the attendant. "That'll be two hundred fifty." 

He can't help being outraged. "So much!" 

The convict shrugs. "Take it or leave it, citizen. That's the fee. You have a complaint, 
file it with King Kwadena Akosu. The lot belongs to him. You'll find him at Casino 
Royale." 

"Hmph. I suppose you want a tip as well." 

"Your gratuity would be deeply appreciated. And bless you, guv." 

A barely legible name badge identifies the Throwaway as GAVIN D. He is gaunt, 
scraggily bearded, and his grin reveals two chipped front teeth. Between his glazed red-
rimmed eyes is a metallic button identifying him as a buzzhead, addicted to electronic 
stimulation of the pleasure centers of the brain. His rainsuit is old and ill-fitting, patched 
with duct tape, smudged in soot, stained repugnantly about the crotch. Only his voice, 
hoarse but still retaining the inflection of an expensive education, reveals that Gavin D. 
was once more than human debris. 

Who was he when he lived Outside? A too clever corporate lawyer? A financial 
officer caught with his hand in the till? A data thief? Another faithless executive who 
sold company secrets to the opposition? 

Gavin D. waits patiently, holding out a filthy hand with broken black fingernails. 
"Cash or plastic. Your first visit to Coventry Blue?" 

"Yes," he growls. Sort out the money, fork it over. A grudging twenty for the tip. The 
man's stink penetrates the closed visor. He backs away in distaste but Gavin D. follows, 
rummaging in the side pocket of his rainsuit. 

Is he going for a weapon? Panic! Drag the Ivanov out of its holster. "Stand back, 
damn you!" 

"Easy—easy does it, guv." A contemptuous snicker. "No one here will hurt you." 
Wink. Grin. "Unless you pay them to." The convict pulls a cheap e-book from his pocket 
and proffers it. "Complimentary guide to the local scene. What sort of action are you 
looking for? Sex? Dope? Gladiators? Gaming?" 

He waves away the book. "Which way to a place called the Silver Scybalum?" This is 
the rendezvous specified by Alis-tair Drummond. 

Silenced in mid-spiel, the attendant's eyes show a spark of revulsion before reverting 
to practiced blankness. "So you're one of those ... Well, different strokes for different 
folks. I hope you brought your niobium Visa card. You're looking at ultra-pricey show 
biz at the SS." 

"Never mind. Just tell me how to find it. And what's a scy-balum, anyhow?" 

"Look in the display window when you get there." The Throwaway hesitates and then 
the grin returns, sly and vindictive. "I wouldn't want to spoil your fun, but you ought to 
know that the performers there are genengineered humans, not the real thing. Neither are 
the baby ho's in the shorteye joints. Genen adult inmates, every last one. No real kids in 


Coventry. The female cons—" 

"Which way, goddammit?" 

"Don't get your twat in a twist. Go down to the Strip, hang a left, go two blocks. You 
can't miss it." Gavin D. turns away and shuffles back to his hovel to await the next 
customer. 

He sets off, moving cautiously on the broken pavement and repeating his soothing 
mantra over and over. Calm, competence, courage! This is a test He'll ace it, and to hell 
with Drummond's mindfucking control games. 

He passes a row of dark, ramshackle flophouses. The only illuminated place is a 
Catholic mission with a holosign that says FREE MEALS 24 MRS. The projection depicts a 
smiling Jesus sketching a blessing with one hand and offering a steaming-hot burger plate 
with the other. A vagrant slouches in the mission doorway, chugalugging the last of a 
bottle of fortified plonk. Inside, a brother in a white karategi with a black belt waits to 
unlock and admit him, sans booze. 

Farther along the street are shuttered storefronts: a day-labor exchange, a noodle 
shop, a minimart with an iron grille across the door and windows. Ragbaggy forms 
huddle in some of the doorways, wrapped in foil blankets against the pelting downpour. 

One calls out to him as he hurries by, an elderly woman whose face is barely visible. 
"Spare some small change, citizen? Brings good luck to feed the animals at the Blue Zoo, 
you know." 

He is superstitious enough to stop and toss her a small-denomination bill, which she 
deftly snatches out of midair. He asks, "Why in the world are you sleeping outside on a 
night like this?" 

"Safer here than in the dormitory blocks," she tells him. "No lushrollers, no pussy 
bandits or bugnuts crawling in bed with you, no screaming meemies, no psychoid icemen 
looking to waste you for the fun of it—" He shuts his ears to the catalog of horrors and 
hurries away, finally reaching the blazing clamor of the Strip. 

Here the sidewalks are thronged with roisterers wearing costly rain gear. Many of the 
pedestrians are anonymously hooded and visored, as he is, but fair numbers of the most 
youthful men and women go bareheaded in spite of the bad weather. Flashily dressed, 
shrieking with sycophantic laughter as they cling to the arms of their incognito escorts, 
these can only be professional whores imported from Outside. Coventry Blue's 
population of upper-echelon corporate felons probably has a perennial shortage of 
inmates who are young, attractive, and reasonably priced. 

The funhouses stand cheek by jowl, tricked out with giant holograms, flashing 
strobes, laser pattern generators, neon constructs, even blinking incandescent-bulb 
marquees. He cannot help gaping at the outrageous displays and the signs that shriek and 
blare the Blue Strip's extravagances: 

 

LIVE YOUR WILDEST WET DREAM GORGEOUS GALS FAB 
FAGS KLASSY KIDDIES LOVERLY LIVESTOCK 
PSYCHODELICADO BOUTIQUE LE POT DE CHAMBRE CORRECTIVE 
WHIPPERSNAPPERS ORGY PORGY HELGA'S HOUSE OF PAIN ROCKET FUEL 
DEPOT NARC NOOKY CESSPOOL FOLLIES PETER PUFFER'S POOFTAH 
PALACE BLOOD GLADIATORS OF ANCIENT ROME CASINO ROYALE—
LOWEST ODDS ON EARTH BOOGIE BOMBITA BANDITA RUSSIAN ROULETTE 


VAMPIRB PLANET ELECTRIC BREATHING LESSONS SALADIN'S 
SNUFFBOX—100% REAL DEATH DRUGS DRUGS DRUGS SEX SEX SEX XXX 
. . . 

 

Grimly, he shoulders his way through the mob, fending off the stoned and the 
importunate. Barkers and strong-arm touts aggressively seek his custom, but a warning 
gesture with his zapper glove sends them off with a cheery "Fuck you, guv!" flung after 
him. The teaser spectacles in the show windows startle him, nauseate him, even arouse 
him—to his shame and consternation, for he is a cultural snob who had thought himself 
to be above such vulgar titillation. 

Calm. Competence. Courage. 

And God damn Alistair Drummond. 

At last he sees his goal, a surprising oasis of conservatism amidst the crashing 
hullaballoo. The large building's facade is slick black, with a bas-relief frieze that appears 
to wriggle and contort, as though trapped living things are attempting to escape a river of 
tar. A modest sign above the sheltering portico says SILVER SCYBALUM. The entrance is 
flanked by two gargantuan doormen in imitation spacesuits of glolame with reflective 
helmets. On either side of the doorway are large windows. The one on the left is 
curtained with silvery drapes. The other, artfully spotlighted, features a curious grotto of 
pitted white rock thickly mottled and veined by black and red minerals. Some of the 
cavities are lined with beautiful ruby-colored crystals. 

He approaches and joins a group of idlers who stare at the xeno creature behind the 
glass. It has the general shape and bulk of a sea lion. The body is roughly pear-shaped, 
clad in a greenish pebbled hide, possessing only two front limbs armed with oversized 
claws with which the thing has anchored itself to the irregular sidewall of the artificial 
cave. 

The hideous wrinkled head is oversized, naked, leathery, with tiny red eyes. 
Wormlike feelers surround its open beak and apparently guide interior mouth parts that 
work like reciprocating drills, pecking industriously at the rock. A larger appendage, like 
a warty tongue, laps up mineral dust as fast as it is produced. The hole the creature has 
gouged sparkles with minute raw metal surfaces and freshly broken crystals that look like 
scarlet flecks of pepper. 

He reads the descriptive sign at the front of the exhibit. 

The sapient denizens of Gwalior [Sector 8], requiring arsenic and sulfur in their 
unique metabolism, consume native rock containing the red mineral proustite (silver 
arsenic sulfide) together with free silver. The latter is egested as a waste product. 

After a few minutes the Gwaliorite detaches itself from the wall and flops down with 
comical abandon, inspiring considerable mirth among the observers. It slithers clumsily 
to a pool of steaming liquid and drinks daintily. Then it rears back and begins to shiver. 

"Yes!" cries one of the crowd. "Do it, sweetheart!" Others contribute encouraging 
shouts. 

The trembling intensifies and the Gwaliorite utters a series of prolonged screams, 
broadcast electronically to the world at large. He recognizes the exotic ululation he had 
heard earlier, in the hopper park. 

After a final tortured cry the alien wriggles backward to a depressed area of the floor 
where there is an in-spiraling gutter. At its center is a sensor knob that suddenly starts to 


blink red. A roll of recorded drums rattles from a loudspeaker. The Gwaliorite lifts its 
massive legless posterior slightly and excretes four golfball-sized droppings of gleaming 
solid metal that roll down the gutter, strike the sensor, and trigger a triumphant display of 
multicolored strobe lights and a flatulent tuba fanfare. 

The crowd applauds raucously, the silver scybala disappear through a little trapdoor, 
and curtains sweep shut on the window, hiding the now motionless creature. 
Simultaneously, the drapes of the second window open, revealing a smaller Gwaliorite 
already munching minerals. 

He remembers the lot attendant's chilling remark about pseudo-alien performers. But 
surely .. . 

He questions one of the spacesuited doormen. "They're animatronic, aren't they? Just 
robots?" 

The giant deopaques his helmet and looks down on him with a patronizing smirk. 
"The exhibits are alive, Citizen Frost. Perfect genen transforms. The procedure is illegal 
on the Outside, but there are no such restrictions in Coventry Blue." 

"But why would even a Throwaway—" 

His queasy speculation is cut short by a sudden chilling insight: the doorman has 
recognized him, called him by name. His supposedly scannerproof visor has been 
penetrated by some high-tech gadgetry and his iris pattern analyzed and identified. 

Alistair Drummond lied when he said that their meeting would be secret. 

The doorman is saying, "We've been expecting you. Here, take this. Your entry fee is 
already paid." In the palm of the outstretched gloved hand is a shining sphere of xeno 
ordure. "The Silver Scybalum will be your passport to erotic delights beyond human 
comprehension. If you choose to accept them." 

With a curse, he knocks the thing aside. The ball falls into a filthy puddle on the 
street, where shouting bystanders scrabble eagerly for it. Both doormen ignore the fracas, 
swing wide the double doors and gesture for him to enter. Having no choice, he does. 

The establishment's lobby simulates a funky 1930s-style Buck Rogers starship, all 
brushed multicolored metal with gemlike rivets, obsidian panels, and round portholes 
framing astronomical scenes. Three heavily muscled ushers, dubiously female, insist 
upon divesting him of his outerwear and weaponry. They wear topless "space-girl" 
uniforms of bias-cut satin with cantilever support for their enormous bare breasts, elbow-
length silver gloves, silver high-heeled boots, and open silver helmets topped with goofy 
little antennas. When they attempt to outfit him in an iridescent bodysuit with strategic 
cutouts he balks and threatens to leave. 

"Be like that," one of the attendants sniffs. "You'll find it very inconvenient for the 
activities." 

They open an inner portal that imitates an antique airlock with a handwheel. "Please 
follow the illuminated floor guides to Citizen Drummond's private box." 

He squares his shoulders and moves forward slowly. It's dark in there. Music swells 
around him and the turgid air is redolent of musky perfume. Amplified moans and other 
wordless human cries mingle with insistent Stravinskyesque discords and thudding 
tympani. At his feet is a trail of tiny green lights shaped like arrows. They lead him down 
a short corridor that opens into a great murky bowl-shaped chamber, a theater-in-the-
round with a central stage surrounded by tiers of spectator boxes that look like imaginary 
space vehicles conceived by a retro comic-book artist. Some of the boxes are open; others 


are enclosed for complete privacy, with mirrored one-way windows. 

The ceiling is velvet-black, sparkling with colored stars and projections of interstellar 
gas clouds and galaxies. On the eerily lit stage, where hologrammatic plantlife 
impersonates an otherworldly jungle, four naked men struggle in the clutches of an 
enormous barrel-shaped alien resembling a feather-crowned purple sea anemone 
equipped with dozens of glistening opaline arms. 

At first glance he thinks that the human performers are being devoured by the 
gorgeous monster. Their torn trek-suits and broken weapons are scattered among the 
scenery. Then he realizes that the men are engaged in bizarre sexual congress with the 
extraterrestrial, convulsing and uttering delirious wails as the final movement of the Rite 
of Spring rises to an overorchestrated crescendo. 

He tastes bile in his throat and turns away, fighting for self-control. When he is 
finally able to pull himself together, the music has reached a thunderous climax—and so, 
evidently, have the human participants in the spectacle. He dares to look again and sees 
the performers lying spent in the beautiful creature's grasp. There is a blinding flash. 
When his vision recovers, he discovers that the stage is empty except for a ring of blue 
footlights. 

He pauses, irresolute. The lights fade, a new tritely erotic theme begins—de Falla's El 
Amor Brujo—and a column of whirling flames momentarily curtains the circular stage. 
The blazing barrier lowers to reveal a more ominous species of exotic seducer, insectile, 
skeletally thin, and studded with atrocious black thorns. It sways hypnotically and its 
amber eyes glow as a woman in ornate bondage harness slowly approaches it with 
outstretched arms. 

The trail of green arrows still glows on the floor. He follows it down a long aisle of 
shallow steps to the lowest tier, which is entirely taken up by six exceptionally large 
enclosed spectator boxes. One of them is his destination. He raps firmly on the 
compartment's side door and it slides open, emitting a cloud of sweet narcotic fumes. 

The Chairman and CEO of Galapharma Amalgamated Concern stands there, dimly 
backlit by interior wall sconces. His princely features have the perfection of genen 
rejuvenation, and every hair of his elaborately styled leonine coiffure is in place. Alistair 
Drummond is a tall man, and his shoulders are massive and his hands very large. He 
wears one of the obscene shiny bodysuits, mercifully covered with a belted scarlet 
brocade dressing gown. Poised artfully in his right hand is an antique jade cigarette 
holder with a smoldering giggle stick. 

"Come in, lad! I'd nearly given up on you." 

"Hello, Alistair." He is a good thirty minutes late but does not apologize. 

Drummond motions his guest inside and shuts the door, diminishing the volume of 
the music. His voice is pitched low, peculiarly soft, with a slight Glaswegian accent. "I 
see that you didn't let the ushers dress you for the occasion. What a shame. I had some 
interesting entertainment planned for us before we got down to mundane matters." 

"No, thank you," he says with polite regret. "Pseudoalien sex isn't really my style." 

Alistair Drummond laughs. His ice-colored eyes show no sign of intoxication, and as 
always, they are completely unreadable. "The Silver Scybalum can furnish any sort of 
amusement you'd like. Anything the Blue Strip has to offer. Don't tell me that none of the 
attractions you saw on the way here appealed to you." 

He mutters, "Not really." 


"You're lying," Drummond says, without rancor. "It had better be your last lie. Do 
you understand me, lad?" 

He swallows. "Yes." 

"Excellent. Would you care for a drink?" 

"Scotch and water would be fine." 

The box seems much larger on the inside and apparently extends back beneath the 
steeply raked auditorium floor. The opulently cheesy interior continues the Art Deco 
starship theme. The place resembles the private retreat of Ming the Merciless or some 
other out-of-date science-fiction potentate. Its most conspicuous piece of furniture is a 
very wide couch covered with burgundy leather that takes up most of the compartment's 
far end. Three matching armchairs stand before a long one-way viewing window 
overlooking the stage. Underfoot lies black carpet as lush as mink fur. An onyx and silver 
food and beverage bar backed by softly illuminated erotic stained-glass murals occupies 
part of the rear wall, where there is a second door with a small electronic service panel 
mounted beside it. 

For a brief, blood-quickening moment he wonders what might have come through 
that inner door if he had accepted the "entertainment" offered by his host. Then he feels a 
quaver of revulsion. Whatever it looked like, it would have been human once. 

Drummond goes to the bar, stubs out the smoldering narcotic joint, and pours thirty-
year-old Lagavulin single malt into two crystal tumblers, adding water to one. Before 
returning with the drinks, he touches a pad on the service unit and speaks. 

"Will you join us now, Baldwin? There's been a slight change in plan." 

Surprise, consternation. "Alistair, I thought we'd agreed that this meeting would be 
private!" 

"Did we?" Drummond hands him the drink. 

He struggles to keep his composure, sipping the marvelous smoky liquor. The inner 
door slides open upon a tunnel that leads into the bowels of the theater. He half expects a 
loathsome xeno facsimile to appear, but the smiling man who enters has a perfectly 
ordinary, even genial, appearance—except for the jarring steely intensity of his eyes. He 
appears to be in his mid-forties and has a narrow face that is slightly freckled. His curly 
auburn hair is cut very short. He is dressed in a neat business suit of oxblood worsted 
with a matching silk turtleneck. Grimacing at Drummond, he mops at one sleeve with a 
pocket square. 

"Some kind of damned slime on the corridor wall got all over me. You wouldn't 
believe the geek collection hanging out back there in the green room!... Or perhaps you 
would." 

Drummond chuckles, turns to his guest and says, "This is Ty Baldwin, head of 
Galapharma Security. He'll sit in on our conference." 

"Glad to meet you, Citizen Frost." Baldwin heads directly to the bar. "Don't mind me. 
I'll set myself up. You two just go ahead with your business." 

Indignation and suppressed fear. "We can't talk in front of him!" 

"Certainly we can," Drummond says easily. "Come and sit down with me by the 
window. We can watch the show while you tell me about the Rampart board meeting." 
He turns up the music. On the stage outside, rings of dancing flame encircle the 
performers. The spiky entity has enfolded the woman in its multiple arms and penetrated 
her. She is bleeding from scores of small wounds. 


He turns away in disgust, almost spilling his scotch as he sinks into one of the 
oversoft leather chairs. "I have some disappointing news. The Rampart Board of 
Directors turned down your acquisition tender again." 

Alistair Drummond speaks so quietly that he can hardly be heard above the driving 
Spanish rhythms. "You stupid shit. You assured me that this time we'd win." 

He forces himself to show no emotion. "The decision was extremely close. I was able 
to pass a resolution calling for a new vote at the end of six weeks. By then the ICS will 
have ruled on Rampart's application for Concern status. They're almost certain to turn us 
down. And then the board will have no alternative but to accept Galapharma's offer—
even if it's lower than the present bid. In the long run this temporary setback will redound 
to your advantage." 

Drummond grunts dubiously, failing to affirm the attempt at damage control. "Who 
was the holdout? Scranton and her mob of Small Stakeholders?" 

"No, it was Katje Vanderpost. Her action was totally unexpected because Beth and I 
had worked very carefully to bring her around. I took a quiet poll yesterday before the 
meeting, when everyone but Katje had already arrived at the Sky Ranch. All the 
stakeholders except Simon Frost were in favor of the Gala merger this time—even Thora 
Scranton. I suspect that Simon found out that Katje had been pressured. The old devil 
went to work on her as soon as her hopper landed. She caved in at the last minute—
saying she couldn't vote for the merger and betray her late brother's dream for the 
Starcorp." "Sodding sentimentality! Trust a damned woman to ignore logic. Her 
quarterstake would eventually double in value." 

"In retrospect, I wonder if Katje's poor health might have influenced her decision 
more than any twaddle about Dirk Vanderpost's noble aspirations for Rampart." He 
pauses, swallowing a fair amount of his drink. "She could be thinking ahead. Intimations 
of mortality. Afraid that her children might contest her will and cut off the major source 
of funding for her precious Reversionist Party if Rampart merges with Galapharma." He 
utters a dry little laugh. "As might very well be the case! Asa tried to get her to set up a 
trust benefiting her pet causes, but she vacillated—thank God. I'll keep hammering away 
at her. We'll get her vote on the next go-around." 

Drummond is obviously uninterested in these tactical details. His gaze is riveted on 
the increasingly lurid theatrics outside, and from time to time he moistens his pale, finely 
chiseled lips. "Just make bloody certain that she favors the merger next time." 

"You have nothing to worry about. When the board meets again in six weeks—" 

"Six weeks!" Once more the gentle intonation of Drummond's voice belies the 
brutality of his words. "I've been waiting four fucking years for you to make good on 
your promises, lad. But your pissant little Starcorp still owns the Perseus Spur, and the 
Haluk trading embargo remains firmly in place. Inside of six weeks the Secretariat for 
Xenoaffairs could launch an official inquiry into Gala's role in the fiasco on the planet 
Cravat. And then my cock could be on the block." 

"Put your mind at rest. There won't be any Cravat inquiry, and no action will be taken 
on the Tokyo University findings, either. My source inside SXA spoke to me on 
Thursday. There's insufficient evidence to justify involving the Special Counsel at this 
time. The genetically modified Haluk cadaver can't be linked to illegal human activity, 
and the secret xeno establishments on Cravat were completely demolished. That left only 
the verbal testimony, and it was finally disallowed." 


"Did the evidentiary hearing reject Eve Frost's deposition, then?" 

"It was never officially submitted to SXA, nor was the corroborating material 
provided by Matilde Gregoire, the new Rampart Security VP. Simon himself convinced 
them not to affirm the previously recorded testimony, for fear of prejudicing our status-
upgrade petition and the pending civil action against Galapharma. You can understand 
how there might have been a jurisdictional dispute between Xenoaffairs and the 
Interstellar Commerce Secretariat if Rampart dragged in an allegation of a Haluk-
Galapharma conspiracy." 

"I can't believe Simon would simply sweep the Cravat affair under the rug." 

"He intends for it to be a significant part of Rampart's civil suit later on. But Simon 
doesn't give a damn that you and some of the other Big Seven Concerns are violating 
trade interdictions with an unsanctioned alien race. Nor is he particularly worried about 
Haluk skulduggery, so long as it doesn't menace any other Rampart Worlds. All he cares 
about right now is averting the clear and present danger—saving his Starcorp from a Gala 
takeover." 

Drummond considers the matter for a few moments before saying, "And Eve Frost 
went along with Simon's decision not to depose the Cravat incident to Xenoaffairs?" 

"She gave in very reluctantly," he admits. "She's become almost paranoid about the 
Haluk since her kidnapping. Eve is convinced that the aliens have sinister designs on the 
Human Commonwealth itself and intend to use their Spur colonies as staging areas for 
expansion into the Orion Arm." 

"That's completely absurd!" 

"Asa may have influenced her thinking on that matter. Unfortunately, he saw the 
Servant of Servants' big new flagship with his own eyes. And you may recall that he also 
has personal knowledge of the Haluk prototype speedsters. His smuggler crony 
Bermudez blasted one to bits en route to Cravat." 

Alistair Drummond's glass is empty, and he hisses a peremptory command to his 
unobtrusive security chief, who is seated on the couch in a shadowy corner of the box. 
"Baldwin, get me another double." 

The man silently complies. Drummond sips and scowls. "What about Asahel Frost's 
evidence? And that of Bermudez?" 

"They insisted on filing their depositions. Simon couldn't stop them. But their 
material was thrown out on grounds of testimonium non probum. My source inside the 
Secretariat tells me that any SXA investigation of a Haluk-Galapharma conspiracy should 
be considered quashed—at least for now." 

“Non probum, eh?" A cold smile. "I like that. Untrustworthy witnesses!" Drummond's 
moment of good humor fades. "But Eve and the Gregoire woman can resubmit their 
testimony without prejudice at any time, can't they?" 

"Once Galapharma has absorbed Rampart, they can only file as private citizens, 
without the stature and legal resources of a Starcorp to bolster their case. We can handle 
that." 

Drummond stares thoughtfully into his drink, finally asking, "What's Simon's 
strategy, as of now?" 

"All efforts are to be concentrated on the last-ditch push for Concern status, since an 
upgrade would eliminate any possibility of a hostile takeover of Rampart once and for all. 
This will take priority over everything else—including the civil action against 


Galapharma. You know that our legal department has sent nothing to the ICS 
Prosecutor's office yet, even though we've given first notice of intent to file. Nazarian's 
people are still gathering data to verify Gala's felonious infiltration and its role in the 
sabotage incidents. Thus far, the corroborating evidence is none too conclusive— unless 
they find out where we've stashed Ollie Schneider. And there isn't a hope in hell of that." 

"We've got nothing to worry about, then," Drummond decides. "It's no secret that 
Simon himself is the principal stumbling block to a status upgrade. The Commerce 
Secretariat will never make Rampart a Concern so long as that vacillating old fart stays at 
the helm." 

"We had a frank discussion about that at the board meeting. Simon knows ICS has no 
confidence in his leadership, but he won't step down unless the board nominates a new 
CEO who meets his approval-—one he's absolutely certain won't turn around and 
immediately sell out to Galapharma. The only candidate acceptable to the old man is his 
daughter Eve, the First Vice President and Chief of Transport and Distribution. 
Fortunately for us, she's chosen to make herself unavailable." 

"That's news to me. How?" 

"To be effective, the new CEO belongs in the Perseus Spur, at Rampart Central on 
Seriphos. But Eve doesn't dare leave the Sky Ranch. She can't let anyone see her in a 
demiclone state, except the members of the board and a few loyal ranch employees." 

Drummond is incredulous. "Are you saying that Eve Frost still hasn't submitted to 
restorative dystasis treatment? It's been six months since her rescue from Cravat!" 

"She has high principles. She insists on preserving incontrovertible evidence of the 
Haluk demiclone scheme—even if her evidence is held in abeyance for the time being. 
It's imperative that she remain in seclusion. If the media found out about her condition, 
Xenoaffairs would be compelled to open an official inquiry into the Cravat can of 
worms." 

"There's no chance that Simon will persuade her to change her mind and go into the 
tank?" 

"Not even to save Rampart. Eve is willing to postpone a public revelation in order to 
give Simon his precious six weeks' leeway. But after the status decision comes down, she 
says she's going straight to SXA and instigate a probe of what she calls Haluk aggressive 
expansionism." He hastens to add, "That won't happen, of course. We'll find a way to 
force dystasis on her." 

"You'd better," says Alistair Drummond, with ominous kindliness. "This is very bad 
news, lad. Very bad." He ponders the implications for some time. "Meanwhile, Simon 
will certainly have to choose another new CEO if there's to be any hope of upgrade. 
Either you, or—" 

He cannot help the bitterness that colors his reply. "Yes. We two are the obvious 
candidates. But unlike the goddamned Golden Girl, both of us have problematical 
executive track records. The Commerce Secretariat might have been willing to grant 
Rampart immediate Concern status with Eve as CEO. She's proved her abilities. But with 
either of us in the top slot, ICS would probably postpone a decision." 

Drummond bursts out laughing. "Then Simon's up shit creek without a paddle. He's 
got to appoint one of you. There are no other suitable candidates. And whomever he 
chooses, Galapharma wins." 

"There's ... something else you should know, Alistair." Calm! Competence! Courage! 


"Eve made an alternative proposal. It was her contention—preposterous on the face of it, 
but perhaps understandable in the light of the Cravat affair—that her brother Asa has the 
potential to solve the problems facing Rampart." 

Alistair Drummond frowns and turns to his security chief. "Baldwin, didn't you tell 
me that Asahel Frost had a blazing row with the old man and his sister last week and 
resigned his rump vice-presidency?" 

"Yes, sir. Our agents report that he left Rampart Central on Seriphos and went back to 
that little freesoil planet, Kedge-Lockaby. He and Simon had been estranged for years. 
Asa joined Rampart only because he loves his older sister Eve and decided that he needed 
the Starcorp's resources to rescue her. Once she was safe, Asa's commitment to Rampart 
became less than solid. He was frustrated by his inability to locate the fugitive Rampart 
Security personnel who were in our employ, and apparently enraged by certain actions of 
Simon's. Asa finally quit in a huff. Our informant on K-L reports that he has publicly 
stated his indifference to the fate of Rampart." 

"What was his quarrel with Simon about?" Drummond asks his guest. 

"Asa took violent exception to what he called his father's cop-out strategy on Haluk 
involvement in the Cravat affair. He even castigated Eve for siding with Simon." 

"By resigning from the Starcorp," Drummond points out, "Asahel Frost reverts to his 
former disenfranchised state and becomes a legal nonentity." 

"Unfortunately," he explains, "Eve's alternative proposal took all that into account. 
She said she would accept the top slot-—become CEO—provided that the board agreed 
she could make Asa Chief Operations Officer, effectively restoring his citizenship. He'd 
work directly under her and be accountable only to her. She'd remain in seclusion on 
Earth, overseeing corporate strategy through subspace com from the ranch, while Asa 
takes personal charge of the Spur operations." 

Drummond seems stunned. His handsome, supercilious face changes into something 
momentarily more human and vulnerable. "Good God. How did the board react?" 

"Oh, they were violently opposed," he says. "Of course, no one dared to say a word 
against Eve personally. Her proposal was finally tabled on consideration of how the 
Commerce Secretariat might react to Asa's appointment. They'd never in a million years 
upgrade a Starcorp with a convicted felon in top management." 

"A framed felon," Ty Baldwin interposes, smiling thinly. 

"Oh, for Christ's sake! Asa's out of it! Thrown Away! Eve never consulted with him 
before nominating him as her right-hand man. If she had, he would have turned her down 
flat. It's not in his nature to be a corporate team player." 

"You're probably right," Drummond says. He seems to have recovered his Olympian 
aplomb. "On the other hand, we can't afford to have this—this bloody beach bum 
interfere with our plans again. Our man on Kedge-Lockaby will have to take Asahel Frost 
out." 

"It shouldn't be difficult to arrange," Baldwin says. 

"Your late assassin, Quillan McGrath, underestimated Asa," the visitor says. 

Drummond's tone is glacial. "He paid the ultimate price, and so did several hundred 
of our Haluk allies. The bastard is an ex-ICS agent and he's proved he can be mortally 
dangerous." 

"Rely on me to see to the matter, sir." Baldwin pauses, then: "Perhaps we should also 
consider a permanent solution to the other grave threat hanging over Galapharma 


Concern and the Haluk. I refer to Eve Frost. In my opinion it would be a mistake to think 
she can be neutralized through forced dystasis." 

The visitor says, "Well, your corporate hit men will never get to Eve so long as she 
stays at the Sky Ranch. The place is impregnable." 

"Not to you," the security chief retorts. 

"You don't give me orders, Baldwin! There's no way I could... deal with Eve without 
compromising myself." 

Drummond hastens to soothe his guest. "And we wouldn't want that to happen, lad. 
By no means. Eve Frost can wait. And you are absolutely correct. Ty doesn't give you 
orders. I do." 

 The Galapharma CEO falls silent, apparently intent upon the culmination of the 
sadomasochistic drama out on the stage. When the final blackout comes, he rises from his 
chair and returns to the refreshment bar, where he begins scrutinizing flasks of exotic 
liqueurs. "You have six weeks, lad. At the end of that time I expect Rampart's petition for 
Concern status to be denied. I also expect you to turn Katje Vanderpost around. One way 
or another her vote must affirm the Galapharma merger. This is absolutely crucial." 

"I understand." 

"I hope you do. I needn't remind you that Katje lives in a Phoenix, Arizona, 
penthouse apartment, not at the Sky Ranch. If she rebuffs your persuasive wiles—if 
exceptional measures become necessary to ensure an appropriate outcome—you will be 
the one to remedy the situation." 

He feels the blood rush to his face. Not trusting himself to speak, he stands rigid, fists 
clenched at his sides. The Galapharma security chief takes a step toward him. But almost 
at once the abrupt surge of rage and panic dissipates. 

"You'll have her vote." 

Drummond nods. He lifts an oddly shaped bottle containing a milky mauve 
concoction, uncorks it and sniffs the contents. "Ever tried this stuff? Gemmulan absinthe. 
Females of the Y'tata race use it to enhance labial dexterity. It's supposed to do 
interesting things to the male human anatomy, too." 

He manages to say, "Is there anything else we should discuss? If not, I should be 
going." 

"You'll be contacted when it's time for us to meet again." 

"Not here," he declares adamantly. 

"Killjoy." Alistair Drummond laughs, turning his back dis-missively upon his guest. 
"Baldwin, did you see any Y'tata analogues on deck when you were waiting in the green 
room?" 

The guest doesn't wait to hear the security chief's reply. Slipping out of the box, he 
closes the door and almost races up the aisle to the exit. 

The three lubricious usherettes sneer as they retrieve his outerwear and weapons from 
the cloakroom, but he takes petty revenge by slapping down a measly fiver for a tip 
before lurching outside into the rowdy commotion of the Strip. The rain has stopped and 
dawn is breaking. The rose and gold radiance of the summer morning sky overwhelms 
the tawdry artificial lighting of the clip-joints. They seem dingy, shrunken, and 
unutterably sad. 

But his ordeal is over. 

Except for the matter of Katje. 


Realizing what he might yet have to do, he staggers through the mob of diehard 
revelers and vomits into the gutter. No one notices. After a few minutes he recovers and 
heads back to his hopper, while the carnival music plays on and the human Gwaliorite 
screams in its silver-draped show window. 

 

 

Chapter 1 

 

I'd been home for three days, and it still didn't feel like home. 

Trouble was, I was depressed. Not just about bailing out of the Rampart mess, but 
about the resolute way that Matilde Gregoire had spoken to me after I'd quit, saying we 
were through. There was no place in her life for a Throwaway charterboat skipper . .. and 
evidently no place in mine for a dedicated Starcorp loyalist. 

Half dressed and barefoot, I stared into the open refrigerator, wondering what I was 
going to eat for breakfast. I'd had my heart set on a monster Tabasco scramble, but all the 
eggs were gone. There were no green peppers, either. I still hadn't done a real grocery 
buy since my return, and the garden had been destroyed in the sea toad attack. 

Just as an interesting alternative popped into my mind, the phone buzzed. I went out 
of the kitchen onto the field-screened front porch of my beach shack, which serves as the 
office and scuba equipment sales area. 

"Cap'n Belly's Dive Charters." 

The caller was female and apologetic. "This is Jenny Chung, Captain. My husband 
and I were supposed to go out with you today, but I'm afraid we'll have to cancel. The 
weather is just awful here at the Big Beach. We checked the report for the Out Islands 
and—" 

"The tropical depression isn't due to arrive in this area until late tonight," I said 
pleasantly. "We're expecting a sunny, calm day in the place I'd picked for our dive." 

"We really don't want to risk it. And we're returning home to Plusia-Prime tonight, so 
we won't be able to reschedule the trip. I'm very sorry. Of course, you may keep our 
deposit—" 

"No," I said, with polite fatalism (and a craven desire to keep on the good side of the 
irascible booking agent at the Manukura Nikko Luxor). "The concierge at your hotel will 
credit you with a refund. Maybe we can go out together the next time you visit Kedge-
Lockaby. Have a nice day, Citizen Chung." I poked the disconnect pad and said, "Rats." 

The Chung couple would have been my first clients since my return from the planet 
Seriphos, and I'd been looking forward to the trip as an affirmation of my reacquired 
independence: I was free of Rampart responsibilities, free of my father's convoluted 
intrigues, free—alas!—of my emotional relationship with a lovely woman who 
disapproved of my undisciplined and feckless ways. 

Well, the choices had been my own. 

I picked up a mesh catch bag and went down the porch steps onto the beach in search 
of marine edibles. The morning sun was still behind the island so the sand was cool, 
shaded by the grove of mint palms that crowd close to my house on three sides. Eyebrow 
Cay's lagoon was mirror-smooth, reflecting a blue sky adorned with a few puffy cumulus 
clouds and countless silvery paintbrush strokes of the comets that infest Kedge-Lockaby's 
solar system. Glasha Romanov's classic fishing smack trolled the calm waters out near 


the reef. A nifty motor-sailer based at Manukura came slowly around Cheddar Head, 
outward bound with a party of tourists after spending the night moored at Gumercindo 
Huckle-bury's marina. (I know: impossible name. But almost everybody on Eyebrow uses 
an alias. Mine is Helmut Icicle.) The big sailboat would probably ride out the upcoming 
storm in the shelter of Alibi Island, our larger neighbor to the west, after sending its 
clients back to the Big Beach on the hop-shuttle. 

Eyebrow Cay is a crescent, as its name indicates, about twenty-five kilometers from 
end to end. The jagged reef, with only two safe passages, extends from each tip of the 
island, completing a lopsided circle and enclosing our lagoon. Almost all of Eyebrow's 
population, under fifty souls, live on the inner shore where there are attractive sand 
beaches. The island's largest natural harbor holds the marina and Sal Faustino's boatyard, 
a few guest houses, a kite shop, and our little general store. 

Many of the folks on Eyebrow Cay are Throwaways, and quite a few others have 
personal histories that don't bear close scrutiny. I definitely fit into the latter category; 
and if Rampart's personnel office was on the ball in upgrading their database, I would 
already have rejoined the former group after a brief sojourn among the franchised 
citizenry of the Commonwealth. 

Two friends share the cove where I live. To the south, half visible through the palm 
grove, is the deceptively modest bungalow of Mimo Bermudez, who may be the 
wealthiest man on Kedge-Lockaby. He is certainly one of the most enigmatic. My 
neighbor on the other side is Kofi Rutherford, another dive charter skipper, whose 
tumbledown dump lies out of sight behind a small rocky rise. 

Both men had come to the rescue when my previous home had been gobbled by a 
giant sea toad, six months earlier. Mimo had shot the monster dead and Kofi helped 
search its stinking guts for salvageable household items . .. among other things. Not much 
of my stuff had escaped the brute's invincible digestive juices. But with help from Mimo 
and Kofi and other good buddies on Eyebrow, I'd ended up with a new little house even 
better than the old one. It still wasn't quite finished. 

There are about four hundred Out Islands strung in a loose archipelago a couple of 
thousand kilometers west of the Big Beach, Kedge-Lockaby's single continent. 
Manukura, our planetary capital, boasts a tiny starport, the best hotels, a clutch of 
boutiques and craftshops, the independent casino that supports K-L's schools, and the rest 
of what passes for Kedgeree civilization. Most permanent residents live on the BB, and 
most Perseus Spur tourists go no farther abroad in search of recreation. The islands are 
much more primitive, more gorgeous, and utterly lawless. This has advantages and 
disadvantages, as I had already discovered and was shortly to reaffirm. 

But first, breakfast! 

I rolled up my jeans and splashed around the shallows, grabbed a dozen yolkworms 
before they could burrow out of reach, and stuffed them in my bag. They're repulsive-
looking greenish squirmers about twenty centimeters long with a fringe of tiny paddles 
along each body segment. The edible part is a yellow sperm sac the size of a small plum, 
which cooks up better than the yolk of a fresh-laid chicken egg. 

I cleaned the catch and tossed the leftovers to an eager flock of elvis-birds that glided 
down out of the mint palms, humming melodiously. Slogging back to the kitchen, I 
thought about how to spend the rest of the day before the storm hit. 

I could paint window frames. (Yuck.) I could design a spiffier brochure to entice 


more sport divers from Big Beach hotels. (Double yuck.) I could start another vegetable 
garden, since the last one had been totaled by corrosive slobber from the shack-eating 
toad. (Exponential yuck, and besides, the impending storm would mess up the new 
plantings.) There were other chores, too, but the prospect had absolutely no appeal. 

Ah, to hell with doing anything useful. I'd spent the last three days unpacking the 
stuff I'd brought back from Seriphos, evicting the vermin who'd snuck into the house 
during my long absence, and testing some new diving gear. Why shouldn't I goof off now 
and visit the Glory Hole? It's my second favorite place in all the galaxy, numero uno 
being the Sky Ranch in Arizona, where I was born. 

(But I hadn't been there for thirteen years. Not since I had announced, fresh out of law 
school, that I was joining the Corporate Fraud Department of the Interstellar Commerce 
Secretariat rather than coming into Rampart Starcorp, as my father had expected.. .) 

I whipped up the scramble and served it on soda biscuits, garnished with locally 
smoked faux lox. Then I called Kofi Rutherford to ask if he'd be my dive buddy. He 
wasn't answering his phone, but I figured maybe I could catch him over at the marina. I 
began to pack a lunch for two, and while I was building sandwiches the phone in my 
pocket buzzed again. 

"Helly, it's Mimo," said a suave, familiar voice. "You have a subspace call. From 
Earth. Your sister, Eve." 

"I'm on my way," I said, hitting the End pad and loping out the kitchen door. My 
phone was a cheap model without video, much less a patch option, so there was no way I 
could have the call transferred. 

The only private SS com on our little freesoil planet was just where you'd expect it to 
be—in the home of Guillermo Javier Bermudez Obregon, semiretired Smuggler King of 
the Perseus Spur and my closest friend on K-L. He's beyond middle-aged, extravagantly 
generous, and inclined to keep mum about his past and present affairs. For reasons that 
are not quite clear to me, I have told him far too much about my own sorry history. 

I trotted along the path through the palms in my bare feet, dodging scissor-shells, 
sandtacks, and the sharp-pointed fallen fronds of the exotic trees, certain that Eve was 
about to deliver the melancholy news that Rampart's Board of Directors had approved the 
shotgun marriage of my family's Starcorp and Galapharma AC. 

I'd figured it would happen. The expectation had been one of my main reasons for 
opting out. 

Mimo was waiting for me behind his screen door, a tall and skinny figure dressed in a 
fawn pashmina dressing gown, beat-up huarache sandals, and nothing much else. His 
habitually uncombed gray hair was even more frowsy than usual, and his lean, deeply 
furrowed face wore a look of grave concern. 

He said only, "This way," and led me down a hallway decorated with primitive santo 
paintings, Maria Martinez pottery, and illuminated wallboxes holding ancient Aztec 
figurines. 

The room that served as his study and command center was finished in cream-colored 
adobe and had a beamed ceiling. The floor was patterned red Mexican tile, softened with 
striped throw rugs. A fireplace, ready for the impending rainy season, held split fingertree 
logs resting on heavy andirons. Cushioned wicker chairs and a sofa stood before it. 
Above the plank mantelpiece with its twin wrought-iron candlesticks hung the portrait of 
a dark-haired woman dressed in the fashion of thirty years ago—my friend's late wife. A 


huge Mexican desk of elaborately carved oak stood before a window that overlooked the 
sea. Along the left-hand wall were two antique bibliotecas crammed with data-dime files, 
reader-slates, e-books, and conventional volumes. Between them, gleaming in modern 
ceramalloy incongruity, hulked a tall gun cabinet that I knew held an awesome collection 
of photon beamers and other portable arms. The communications equipment occupied an 
alcove of its own, framed by exotic plants growing in black Oaxaca alias. 

The old smuggler gestured for me to sit down at the transceiver console. "When 
you're finished, I'll give you coffee." He left the room. 

I touched the Open pad, then went through the rigamarole of iris-ID verification and 
establishment of a Phase XII encrypt filter. When that was complete, my big sister's 
awful face appeared on the monitor screen and she spoke to me across the fourteen 
thousand light-years separating the Perseus Spur from Earth. 

"Asa, the Galapharma merger bid was turned down again by the Rampart board. 
Thanks to Mom." 

"Katje voted with Simon?" I was thunderstruck. "But I thought she'd switched over to 
the other side!" 

"So did all the rest of us, going into the meeting. But somehow, Pop talked her out of 
it. Cousin Zed, Leo Dunne, and Gianni Rivello were livid. Even Dan and Beth were 
shocked to the socks." Eve was smiling, and it broke my heart to see her semimorphed 
features, partially human and part Haluk as a result of the interrupted demiclone genetic 
engineering procedure instigated by her kidnappers. 

"The bad news is," she continued, "there'll be another vote taken in six weeks, 
immediately after ICS rules on Rampart's status upgrade. If we don't make the jump and 
gain Concern immunity, I'm afraid we're wiped." 

"So Simon refused to retire?" 

"On the contrary. He agreed to step down if the board elected what he called a 
suitable successor—one whom the ICS would have confidence in. The consensus was 
that neither Zed nor Dan really fit the bill. The only viable candidate left was moi." 

"Yes!" I enthused. "I knew it! Congratulations, Evie—" 

"Not so fast, little brother. I turned Simon down. Conditionally." 

"What the hell does that mean?" 

"I don't dare travel to Rampart Central on Seriphos, where an effective CEO 
rightfully belongs. I'd be a sitting duck for the media or even Galapharma hired guns. But 
I can't run the Starcorp from Earth, either, hiding out at the Sky Ranch. It would be an 
administrative nightmare, given the horrendous problems we're facing. I told the board 
that I would accept the CEO job under one condition: that they elect you Chief 
Operations Officer, immediately under me." 

"What!" 

"Zed could retain the presidency—nominally—but he'd no longer be in a position to 
give orders and screw things up. On purpose or otherwise. I'd remain on Earth and call 
the shots very broadly. You'd be on Seriphos or wherever else you were needed, doing 
what had to be done any way you saw fit. Between the two of us, we can pull the show 
back on the road and impress the pants off ICS. What do you say, kid?" 

I couldn't say anything. I only sat there, open-mouthed, in a state of total disbelief. 

Four days ago at Rampart Central on the planet Seriphos, when I still held the ad hoc 
title of Vice President for Special Projects foisted on me by my father, I'd taken part in a 


three-way conference call with Simon and Eve, who were back on Earth. We wrangled 
about what I perceived as the Haluk threat. 

I had just learned that my Cravat deposition to SXA had been shitcanned. Mimo's 
statement and that of our young associate, Ivor Jenkins, had also been disallowed on the 
same legal technicality. I demanded that Eve show her Halukoid self immediately to 
Assembly Delegate Efrem Sontag, an old university friend of mine who was now 
Chairman of the Xeno-affairs Oversight Committee. Eve's mutation, together with a 
formal complaint that the Haluk had been stealing the genen viral vector PD32:C2 from 
Rampart and conducting a secret demiclone project on Cravat, would provide valid 
grounds for suspicion that the aliens were up to dirty work, possibly aided and abetted by 
Galapharma. My pal Sontag could be counted on to light a fire under the feet of the 
secretariat, forcing it to launch a full-scale investigation into dubious Haluk activities in 
the Perseus Spur. 

But Simon had his own reasons for refusing to file a complaint about the vector theft 
and the Cravat shenanigans immediately, and for pressuring Eve to remain in hiding until 
after the status upgrade decision. He explained everything to me in words of one syllable, 
and also stoutly maintained that he could stave off the Gala acquisition bid at the 
upcoming general board meeting. 

I told my father that his reasoning sucked. And if the takeover did go through, 
Galapharma would be in a position to conceal the vector theft evidence and fatally 
weaken Eve's deposition against the Haluk. 

Our conference deteriorated into a shouting match. I berated Simon for putting the 
welfare of the family Starcorp ahead of a possible alien threat to the human hegemony in 
the Spur worlds—and maybe in the Orion Arm itself. 

Simon told me I didn't understand the Big Picture. 

I told him what he could do with said picture. 

Eve tried to soothe the pair of us. 

I lashed out at her for compromising her principles. 

Finally, I tendered my resignation as VP Special Projects, announced that my tiny 
department was herewith dissolved, and wished my father, my sister, and Rampart 
Starcorp the best of left-handed luck. 

Simon called me a traitor to the family honor, a sorry-ass bent cop, a born loser, and a 
cowardly coyote. Then he cut out of the conference. Eve remained calm and said she'd 
call later to let me know how the board meeting went. 

 

After announcing my bail-out to Matt and to Karl Na-zarian, my associate and 
nominated successor in Special Projects, I left Seriphos with my tail between my legs. 
Home again on my little tropical island, I tried to expunge from my mind the improbable 
events of the past six months that had torn me out of my beachcomber's paradise and 
plopped me back into the turbulent mainstream of the Commonwealth of Human Worlds. 

The mental delete job hadn't been going too well. 

And now my sister had come up with this. .. 

"Evie, you're stark staring loco. I can't run Rampart." 

"Of course you can, with competent support. Once upon a time, you were an excellent 
bureaucrat, Divisional Chief Inspector Asahel Frost." 

"Oh, sure. And how would the ICS Upgrade Committee react to my appointment?" 


She laughed. "The Board of Directors asked me the same question. Dan and Cousin 
Zed figured ICS would go seriously apeshit, and so my proposal was tabled. But not 
formally rejected! I didn't force a vote because I wanted to ask you whether you'd accept. 
In my opinion, ICS will react to your COO appointment in the same way that they did 
when Simon made you VP Special Projects: they'll judge your performance by results 
and not quibble about your shady reputation. You did a hell of a job on Cravat, Asa. And 
there are still people at Commerce who don't believe you were guilty of malfeasance and 
all the rest of it. You aren't without friends in high places." 

"Horse apples." 

The half-alien face was almost impossible to read. She spoke very softly. "You don't 
have to give me a decision immediately. Think about what I've said. The moment that 
Rampart makes Concern, I'll institute a civil action against Galapharma. Jump on 'em 
with rowel-spur boots. Throw the Cravat affair in their teeth. Expose that damned Gala 
hit man, Elgar/McGrath. Implicate him in my kidnapping and demi-cloning and the 
attempts to murder you. Let the media know how Gala has tried to undermine and 
devalue Rampart to force the merger. And their secret dealings with the Haluk aren't 
merely violations of interstellar commerce. They're treason, Asa! We'll crush those 
bastards. You and I!" 

"Evie ... we don't have enough evidence for any sort of case against Galapharma. Not 
without Ollie Schneider as a star material witness." 

"Then find him, goddammit!" 

"I've tried," I said wretchedly. "Karl and Matt and I combed the Spur from one end to 
the other, using all of Rampart's security resources and whatever help we could pry out of 
Zone Patrol. Schneider and his passel of Gala infiltrators have vanished without a trace. 
They must have escaped to the Orion Arm. And we haven't a prayer of tracking them 
there, among so many human worlds." 

"Find other evidence, then. Play the Qastt angle. Put the screws on those Squeak 
pirates we've still got locked up on Nogawa-Krupp. They were dealing directly with the 
Haluk. Maybe some of them had contact with Bronson Elgar or other Galapharma covert 
agents." 

"I never thought of that. It's a long shot, but I can put Karl Nazarian on it—" 

"I want you on it!" Oh, God. Tears were running down her blue alien cheeks. 

"But Evie—" 

"Please work with me, Asa. Simon can call an extraordinary session of the board and 
ram both our appointments through. All the directors will remain on Earth for another 
week." 

"I don't see how—" 

"Will you at least think about what I've said? Give me your decision tomorrow. 
Whatever it is, I'll accept it." 

I hesitated, then said, "All right, Evie. Tomorrow." 

"Love you, Asa. Goodbye." My older sister's mutated face winked out and I shut 
down the subspace communicator. 

Why the hell didn't I have the guts to say no to her, once and for all? 

Because I'm a cowardly coyote, that's why. 

I left the study and went to find Mimo. He was sitting at his dining room table, a 
polished wooden slab supported on wrought-iron legs, reading the morning news on a 


jumbo magslate. He had put his clothes on and now wore pressed slacks and a madras 
plaid sport shirt. His hair was still flyaway frizz. 

"Sit down, Helly. Let me pour you some coffee. It's real Colombian Narino. One of 
my colleagues just brought in a new shipment." 

I accepted a big stoneware cupful and drank the embargoed elixir in silence for 
several minutes. Mimo read his slate without further comment. 

Finally, 1 said, "Rampart's still alive. A six-week reprieve, courtesy of my mother." 

"Good. I hope she's well." 

I didn't respond to that. As of four days ago, Katje was very far from being well. 
Simon had slipped in that sad piece of intelligence during our acrimonious confab. My 
parents had been divorced for twenty-three years, but they were still coolly friendly. 
Katje had always voted her corporate quarterstake as Simon advised her to, until Eve's 
kidnapping and the threats against my life and those of my older brother Dan and 
younger sister Bethany had terrified her and nearly convinced her to capitulate to the 
Galapharma takeover bid. 

I said, "Eve was offered the Rampart Chief Executive post. She said she'd accept only 
if I became her ops officer." 

"Caracoles! And what did you say?" 

"That I'd let her know tomorrow. But I'll have to turn her down. The situation is 
hopeless. She seems to think that Rampart still has a shot at making Concern status. I 
don't. There's no way she and I could ever turn the Starcorp around inside of six weeks, 
corral a heap of fresh venture credit for expansion, and prove that Galapharma had used 
criminal pressure tactics in the takeover bid. Rampart's a goner. If only we'd tracked 
down that fucking turncoat Ollie Schneider..." 

"Ah." Mimo looked thoughtful, even sly. Perhaps I should have suspected something, 
but I was immersed in my own frustration—to say nothing of my guilt. 

"I've had a bellyful of Rampart, Meem. What I really have to do is figure out a way to 
force the Commonwealth to take the Haluk threat seriously. At the moment, I haven't a 
clue. So I'm going scuba diving, and fuck the fate of the galaxy." 

My friend nodded tolerantly. "Can 1 prevail upon you to bring back some nice fish 
for dinner? Perhaps a few flapjaw demons. I'll grill them and make my special sweet 
pepper salsa if you'd care to join me." 

"Happy to. We can watch the storm roll in." 

"The colleague who smuggled the coffee also provided me with a case of 'twenty-nine 
Woodward Canyon Reserve Chardonnay from Washington State that I'd like your 
opinion of. It received the highest rating in The Wine Advocate" 

"Sounds excellent." 

As I was leaving, Mimo said, "Oh—one last thing. There's a remote chance that 
another guest might join us for dinner." 

Something in his tone made me leery. "This person wouldn't be female, by any 
chance?" I wouldn't put it past the romantic old fart to try to fix me up with a new 
sweetie—or even lure Matt Gregoire to K-L in hopes of reconciling us. 

"He's a business acquaintance of mine who is flying in from Callipygia. Masculine ... 
most of the time." He shrugged. 

"No problema then. Catch you later." 

I went back to my place, put on my OK Corral sweatshirt and a pair of Teva sandals, 


and grabbed the sack of sandwiches. Then I got my personal dive gear off the porch, 
loaded it on my new antigrav tote, and headed down our island's single marl road to the 
marina. On the way I stopped in at Billy Mulholland's Mercantile and augmented the sack 
of lunch with two liters of rozkoz-gold milk, a six-pack of Pepsi-Cola chillinders, and a 
couple of bananas. Then I gave him a grocery list I'd prepared, and said I'd pick up the 
food around sundown. 

"Taking Pernio out today, Helly?" Mulholland asked me. 

"Yep. My charter fell through, so I'm just gonna knock around. You see Kofi 
anywhere?" 

"He was in earlier for a cappuccino, fresh off the dawn hop-shuttle from the Big 
Beach. Try his boat." 

Billy Mulholland was a poker player nearly as artful as my old man, and the only 
other Eyebrow denizen besides myself and Mimo who was born on Earth. He was a 
handsome devil who got busted and Thrown Away for operating a Ponzi investment 
scam that plundered the stock portfolios of a few hundred credulous old ladies in Sydney, 
Australia. After serving a five-year term in a DPR in Goondiwindi, he dug up the small 
stash he had managed to hide from the law and bought a ticket to the Perseus Spur. 

He finished adding up my bill on an old-fashioned calculator. "Should I put this lot on 
your tab, mate?" 

"Nah, I'm flush again." I proffered an EFT card primed with the obscene amount of 
severance pay I had received from Rampart. If I was discreet, the sum would take care of 
my modest domestic needs for the next ten years or thereabouts. 

Leaving the store, I passed Jinj & Peachy's Bed & Breakfast. The gals were sweeping 
their veranda and watering hanging baskets of flowers. The Tallhorse sisters were a 
sweet-natured pair, parolled and Tossed after serving time for armed robbery on Fanning-
Alpha. I gave them a wave and a grin, then moved on downhill to Gumercindo 
Hucklebury's marina. Goom himself, a rumored wife-murderer from Tikchik, was 
engaged in a furious argument with Seedy McGready over the old fisherman's penchant 
for dumping piscoid guts off the dock after cleaning his catch. 

I said, "Hi, guys." They halted their squabble long enough to bid me a friendly good 
morning, then went at it again, hammer and tongs. 

Kofi Rutherford's rattletrap sport submersible, Black Coffee, was in its slip, and he lay 
on his stomach on the aft flat, installing a new surefoot covering. His rinky-dink boat was 
down for repairs more often than not, so he frequently served as first mate on mine. 

"Yo, my man," he called as I hove into view with the tote wafting after me. "Come 
aboard. Time I took a break anyhow. This job is a megabummer." 

He climbed to his feet and stretched, working the cramps out of his splendid 
mahogany body. Kofi is a couple of centimeters taller than I am but less heavily muscled, 
a top-notch diver who knows more about the Kedgeree underwater realm than anyone 
else in the islands. He was wearing chartreuse shorts patterned with pink flamingos, and a 
duckbill gimme cap bearing the Macrodur AC logo. 

Next to Mimo Bermudez, Kofi was my closest pal on K-L. He was an embezzling 
accountant from Cush in the Orion Arm, on the run from the enforcers of Omnivore, the 
Big Seven food and beverage Concern. He managed to escape his planet with a briefcase 
stuffed full of high-end negotiables but lost the loot when Qastt bandits boarded his 
starliner in the no-man's-land around the Fungo Bat Nebula. His temperament tended 


toward the morose, perhaps because of the fiscal disaster, but he was dependable and 
hardworking and knew how to keep clients happy. 

I had let him use Pernio during my late stint with Rampart, and I swear there were 
tears in his eyes when I told him I'd come back to the islands to stay. Could be that the 
poor guy's emotions were somewhat mixed. 

"How's about coming out diving with me?" I offered. "My sports cancelled and it's a 
perfect day for a dip. Won't be too many more like this before the rainy season sets in for 
good." 

He sighed. "You're tempting me somethin' fierce, man. But I gotta get this flat 
patched, then go fix the roof on my shack... Where you figure on heading?" 

"Glory Hole. Maybe see a giant cometworm. They come into the shelves before bad 
weather. Aw, c'mon, Kof. You know I don't like to dive alone." 

"Maybe you can find someone else to buddy up with." He thought about it, frowning. 
"Damn. Might be tough to do today. Oren's at the Beach, picking up a new load of 
fritzware from his Dumpster-divers, Glasha went fishing, and Tewfik told me he was 
gonna hop over to Alibi to see his girlfriend." 

"Never mind. I'll do a solo. What're rules for if you can't break 'em once in a while?" 

"Tell you what, Helly. If there's anything left of the day when I finish, I'll come on 
out and join you. If I don't make it, stop by my place on your way home and we can pop 
some hops." 

"You got a deal. Be seeing you." 

Pernio was tied up temporarily at Sal Faustino's boatyard across the tiny harbor from 
the marina. My sub is a forty-year-old Mawson with a lot of good years left. A portion of 
my corporate gratuity had financed a complete overhaul of the sturdy old bucket's 
engines and systems, plus a fresh coat of buttercup-yellow paint. Her name is the medical 
term for frostbite. Sneaky little play on words there, a veiled reference to the exalted 
family moniker. She's equipped with a retractable flybridge for surface running, a stereo 
system featuring recordings of golden oldies by the Beatles and Jimmy Buffet, a big 
underwater viewport, and a framed copy of my personal motto: SPORT DIVERS ARE 
ALWAYS IN OVER THEIR HEADS. 

I went aboard with my gear and spent a half hour checking the sub out. She looked 
great and the engines purred like the big fat Persian cat that guarded the door at Jinj & 
Peachy's guest house. I left Pernio idling at the slip and went to pay the bill. 

In response to my hail, Sal Faustino emerged from the machine shop and gave me a 
cool greeting. She's the best marine engineer in the Out Islands, a square plascrete block 
of a woman whose flaming temper conceals a heart as soft as a creamed ham pie. Sal 
used to love me like a foster son until she found out that my real name wasn't Helmut 
Icicle. 

"I'm taking Pernio out today, Sal. She looks great." 

"Thanks." She didn't offer her hand, maybe because it was covered with grease. And 
maybe not. 

"I'd like to settle up with you." 

She hmphed. "Rampart plastic, I suppose." 

"That's right," I said mildly. 

"Yeah. Well, c'mon into the office." 

A few folks on Eyebrow Cay really got their knickers in a knot when they discovered 


I was the son of Rampart's queso grande. The piss-off quotient maximized when I 
actually signed on with the Starcorp in order to expedite the search for Eve and her 
kidnappers. Even though K-L was a freesoil world, Rampart still exerted a chilling 
influence over the little planet's economy—most especially its Orion Arm imports, which 
largely made the trip on Rampart transport and had moderately appalling price markups 
as a result. The situation was only partially alleviated by the Spur's thriving smuggler 
community. 

Sal was one of those who disapproved of my family connections on general 
principles. Now that I'd quit Rampart and reverted again to Throwaway, she was still 
grumpy, but inclined to let me worm my way slowly back into her good graces. 

"Keep an eye on the starb'd propulsion unit," she muttered, handing back the EFT 
card. "Had to use a rebuilt injector when those snots at BB Nautical wouldn't let me have 
a new one. 'Reserved for regular customers,' they said! I suppose I should've mentioned 
the Holy Name of Frost—" 

"I'm sure a rebuilt will be fine." 

"You know about the storm coming, right? Where you heading?" 

"Place I know near Teakettle. I plan to be back long before the weather turns. So 
long, Sal. Thanks for rushing the refit." 

Ten minutes later my yellow submarine and I chugged through the reef passage into 
the calm blue alien ocean. 

Any real sailor will tell you that a glory hole is a place on shipboard to store odds and 
ends. Mine, however, is a genuine hole in the bottom of the sea, as celebrated in the old 
barroom ballad. 

In my alter ego of Cap'n Helmut Icicle, I never took sport-diving clients to my secret 
spot. Mimo, Kofi Rutherford, and a handful of other close friends on Eyebrow Cay have 
shared the Glory Hole's heart-stopping beauty with me, but for the most part I've kept it 
for myself as a sort of private sanctuary—maybe the closest thing to a sacred place that 
my battered psyche will acknowledge. 

To get there you have to go nearly two hundred kilometers southeast of Eyebrow to 
the treacherous, uncharted shoals south of Devil's Teakettle Island. Then, if you're driving 
a sub, you crank up the flybridge and navigate on the surface, eyeballing your way 
through a skimpy serpentine channel full of razor-sharp lava rock and half-submerged 
coralline heads, trying not to tear the bottom out of your vessel. Eventually you come to a 
dead end in the midst of a featureless shallow flat some seven kilometers offshore. 

Now it's time to anchor the boat and start walking or swimming, depending on the 
tide. It was on the ebb this morning but still at armpit depth, so I was able to swim to the 
hole. 

I dressed out in the brand-new gear I'd splurged on before I'd left Seriphos: a Phoque 
skinsuit and BC, an ultralight-weight NeLox rebreather helmet with a depth spectrum 
compensator lens, and a Rolex dive computer with sonicom, magfield navigation, and 
lots more bells and whistles. Sitting on the forward flat of the sub, I donned another new 
toy: Corby jetfins, a lazy man's way to move around underwater that I'd long lusted after 
but hadn't been able to afford prior to my Rampart gig. They were controlled by means of 
a single shell-glove worn on the left hand. 

I butt-scooted onto the starboard descender, tapped its control pad, and let the 
mechanism lower me into the water. Easing myself prone, I did a small buoyancy tweak, 


then clamped the fingers of my gloved hand together mittenwise and flexed them slightly 
to activate the fin waterjets. 

Hot damn! I was off and steamin', gliding effortlessly just beneath the surface at a 
minimum rate of knots with nary a splash, one with the fishies. 

The preset navigation display on my faceplate showed me the way to go. There was 
almost no current on this side of the volcanic island and the waters were transparent as 
air, with visibility almost unlimited—not that there was much to see as yet. The bottom 
was mostly featureless grayish sand, pocked here and there with odd small craters. Most 
of them were no more than twenty or thirty centimeters wide, dark blue at the center, 
densely edged with lacy pink, lavender, and lime-green sessile animals. The only free-
swimming piscoids on the flat that day were tiny golden creatures no larger than 
terrestrial guppies. They fled ahead of me in panicky schools before spiraling en masse 
into a handy bolthole, as though they were glittering confetti being sucked down a drain. 

The moored yellow submarine was nearly invisible against the background of 
wooded Teakettle Island when I finally reached my destination, over two kilometers 
away. From the surface the Glory Hole appears as a perfectly round azure aperture about 
two meters in diameter, sited mysteriously in the midst of pale shallows punctured by 
countless smaller openings. 

I turned off my jets by splaying my fingers and flippered along with the most 
exquisite caution, for the hole's timid denizens are easily spooked. Drifting to the rim, I 
planted a locator-float with a dive flag. Then I adjusted my buoyancy compensator to 
permit the slowest possible descent, feet first, body motionless. The NeLox rebreather 
gives off no noisy bubbles and its little tanks can sustain an adult human for nearly half a 
day at moderate depths. The water, uncomfortably warm on the flat above, cooled as I 
sank through a short shaft of white rock alive with colorful sea-daisies, waving banners 
of blue-green seaweed analogues, and colonies of miniature firecracker spongids that 
"exploded" scarlet defensive nematocysts as I passed by. Unlike the deadly weaponry of 
their larger cousins, these tiny poison darts bounced harmlessly off my skinsuit. 

I emerged from the tube into a kind of underwater arcade, a unique realm that lies 
beneath the enormous shelf reef that partially encircles Teakettle. The coral ceiling was 
perforated by hundreds of small openings that admitted narrow bright beams of angled 
sunlight like theatrical spots, illuminating the gorgeous creatures that inhabit the Glory 
Hole as though they were precious specimens on display in a museum. Every nuance of 
color that would ordinarily be lost at depth was restored to vivid perfection by the 
compensating mechanism of my faceplate lens. 

Huge amber filigree sea fans, peony-worms with cerise gills, and iridescent violet 
plum-tunicates grew on the rocky piers supporting the shelf. Hanging beneath some 
sections were dense thickets of dainty shrub-corals and bryozoans. Their fragile branches 
glimmered like faceted jet or pink mother-of-pearl and harbored slowly creeping emerald 
and cobalt molluscoids. 

The floor of the Glory Hole was pure white sand separating a series of fantastic 
gardens browsed by slow-moving schools of autumn-leaf fish, calico cheepers, and 
fearless hula-hoop microsharks. Blue and silver toadstool algids grew amidst cannonball 
crinoids streaked with neon red. Flowering vine gorgonians festooned gigantic 
translucent barnacles. From sheltered crevices among the encrusted rocks, alien crus-
taceoids in shiny armor watched me with calm, fiery eyes. 


There were plenty of sleepy-looking flapjaw demons hanging about, ugly but 
delicious fish analogues about half as long as my forearm with sharp little triangular 
teeth, stra-bismic eyes, and leathery muddy-red skin. Normally, demons are sluggish and 
inoffensive; but they go into a feeding frenzy when there's blood in the water, so I didn't 
want to bother them until it was time to leave. Then I'd capture the designated dinner 
subjects with my hands, pop them into my catch bag, and dispatch them when I got back 
to the sub. 

Twenty meters or so from the entrance to the hole was a flat rocky area the size of a 
billiard table that hosted very few bottom-dwelling organisms. In its center floated a 
cheap plastic lawn chair, tethered to a rocky knob with two short lengths of cord. This 
was my nautical throne, in which I was accustomed to rock in the cradle of the deep. 

I brushed a few clinging marine animals from the seat and settled down gratefully. 
The chair touched bottom, then tilted gently to and fro. Doing my best to empty my mind 
and surrender to the Glory Hole's soothing enchantment, I breathed slowly and steadily, 
attempting to achieve an altered state of consciousness that would wipe away my malaise 
and persistent sense of guilt. Now and then curious scavenger fishes or creeping 
arthropodal life-forms would investigate my swaying body. When they found that I was 
inedible, they went away. My eyes began to close... 

What was that? 

I snapped out of my reverie, aware of a sudden anomalous movement among the 
indigo shadows on the landward side of the arcade. The sea floor rose in there, coral 
pillars thickened into virtual corridors, and the illuminating holes in the ceiling were few 
and far between. Something was fitfully thrashing around in the twilit caverns, and it was 
very large. 

A rush of adrenaline banished my mystical mood in a nanosecond. I gripped the arms 
of the plastic chair and asked the dive computer to do a targeting scan. My faceplate 
darkened slightly. The fairy-tale scene lost most of its color and seemed to flatten into 
two dimensions. A huge shape seemed to be tied in a knot behind one of the thicker 
columns. The targeter gave its range as 33.2 meters. 

"Identify," I whispered. The display confirmed what I already suspected: 
PROBABILITY 86%: GIANT COMETWORM— 

THALASSOKOMETIS MAGNIFICA. 

Most members of the Kedgeree diving community rated the creature as the most 
beautiful marine species on the planet. It was also one of the rarest. 

I switched the faceplate back to normal mode and finned toward the fabulous beast. 
Within a few moments it was clearly visible to my enhanced eyes. The rounded head was 
about the size of a big beachball, blue and gently fluorescent, with enormous white-
glowing eyes and a luminous golden mane of hairy filaments. Its mouth gaped, revealing 
multiple rows of sharp glassy fangs. The body was thick as a man's thigh, matte-black, 
adorned with horizontal lines of glowing crimson, amber, and white sparks that were 
brightest and most numerous near the head and faded to invisibility at the tail. Swimming 
freely, the creature would have been at least six meters long. 

But this specimen was unable to swim. It was entangled in the tenacious meshes of a 
crude drift-net. 

"Aw, shit," I whispered. 

As I hovered at a safe distance, the cometworm ceased its impotent struggling. The 


head turned and looked straight at me, then tilted slightly to one side. Slowly, the 
formidable jaws closed. The headlight eyes blinked. I remembered that these animals 
were reputed to be very intelligent. Was there a hope that this one might let me cut it 
free? 

I drew my knife from its leg-scabbard and held it in my extended right hand. The 
worm tilted its head to the other side, as if in puzzlement. Holding my left arm tightly 
against my side, I performed a brief mime show, pretending that the limb was stuck. 
Then, beginning at the wrist, I simulated short chops with the blade that gradually "cut" 
the arm free of its invisible bonds. 

"I can do this for you," I said quietly. "How about it?" 

The worm blinked again. 

I shifted the knife to my other hand and repeated the demonstration. The cometworm 
stared. I swam toward it with infinite caution, keeping the knife extended in my right 
hand. If it lunged at me, I was prepared to activate the jetfins and haul ass. But it 
remained motionless, waiting. 

"Okay, big guy. Here's how it works." 

I grasped a trailing end of the net and sliced off a hunk, letting the mesh float free. 
The worm didn't move. I ventured closer, took hold of a section that enveloped the 
creature's midsection, and began to cut in earnest. Its skin was like black velvet studded 
with tiny gems. It trembled slightly when I inadvertently touched it, but otherwise 
remained still, suspended a meter or two above the sandy sea floor. I worked carefully, 
slicing apart the tangles, while the eerie eyes watched me and seemed to approve. 

Finally, the job was done. I wadded up the net shreds and tucked them into my catch 
bag, finned backward, and put the knife away. "That's all, fella. You're free." 

The great serpentine bulk undulated gracefully and the creature opened its mouth 
wide. Then it gave a final blink and eeled off into the darkness. 

A voice in my helmet earphone said, "Nice going." 

I spun around in delighted surprise and saw a familiar skinsuited figure equipped with 
scuba gear. He was back in the well-lit section of the Glory Hole, coming toward me, and 
he carried a gas-powered speargun under his arm. 

"Kofi! Hey, man, you made it after all!" 

"That's right. The thought of you out here all alone in a place almost nobody knows 
about... I just had to come." 

I swam to meet him, chuckling. "Well, you won't need the gun. The cometworm was 
tamer than a pussycat. It seemed to know I was there to help." 

"Yeah. I saw. Damnedest thing. I've heard those worms are smart. Must have been a 
fluke, the critter getting caught in a net. Some of those back-to-nature clowns over on 
Sindbad Cay go in for primitive fishery techniques." 

"Well, all's well that ends well." 

"Too bad it doesn't," my friend said. 

He was less than four meters away when he lifted the speargun, aimed it squarely at 
me, and pulled the trigger. 

 

 

Chapter 2 

 


I clenched my left hand and the jets blasted me upward at an oblique angle. The spear 
missed, but I smashed headfirst into the coral ceiling and nulled out amidst a cascade of 
exploding colored stars and shellshocked marine life. 

When I came to my senses, skull throbbing, Kofi was almost done with the job of 
lashing me securely to my plastic throne with duct tape. 

"What the hell?" I moaned. 

"Getting you ready for the deep six, old buddy. Sorry about this. Nothing personal, 
you understand. The word came down while I was back in Manukura. Seems that some 
very important people are torqued 'cause you still exist. Thought they'd forgotten all 
about you, but I guess they were just hangin' back till some shady stuff clarified. 
Anyhow, I've been designated to finish some previously bungled business." 

"Kofi," I said. "Kofi... for God's sake!" 

"I really hate this," he told me, with what seemed like genuine remorse. "But you 
gotta understand, Helly, it's my ass or yours." 

He finished fastening my flippered legs, slicing off the end of the tape neatly with his 
dive knife. "See, yesterday this seriously dire dude sidles up to me in the Raiatea Bar on 
the BB. He tells me that I either polish you off in a tidy and workmanlike fashion tout de 
suite, or somebody'll notify Omni-vore's gorillas that I'm hiding on K-L. That happens, 
the Foodies give me a five-minute trial, call me guilty of grand larceny and 
embezzlement in the first degree, then haul my handsome black butt back to Earth and 
lock me up in Coventry Blue till hell chills out." 

I shook my head in disbelief. My pal Kofi. We'd worked together, got drunk together, 
saved each other's lives once or twice on hairy dives. He'd even helped build my new 
shack after the sea toad ate the original when I should have been inside but wasn't. 

"Were you in on the toadster caper, too?" I asked sadly. 

"Only in an advisory capacity. Bron Elgar screwed that job up all by himself. Never 
did like that sadistic motherfucker. Slow on the payoff, too." He tucked the roll of tape 
into a waist pouch and honed the blade's razor edge gently against one of his BC straps to 
get the sticky stuff off. He didn't put the knife away. 

"So you're just gonna leave me here to die? Jesus, Kofi! There's nine more hours of 
NeLox in my tanks. Can't you rip off my helmet and at least make it quick?" 

He shook his head. "Wish I could, but I've got my orders: no bod for autopsy, but 
enough residual DNA in the bones and scraps to confirm your ID. You had a tragic 
accident, see. Except, your mother will get the real message and quit trying to stave off 
the inevitable—" 

"My mother\" I surged violently against the duct tape. It got me nowhere. 

"Hold still now," Kofi admonished, "and this'll hurt less." 

He started to work on me with the dive knife. Beginning with my upper arms and 
proceeding down the areas of my trunk unencumbered with equipment and onto my 
thighs, he sliced through my skinsuit and into the flesh beneath. I screamed and cursed, 
writhing helplessly and blinded by tears ofpain. 

"Almost done!" he soothed me. "One more time. There we go." 

I howled into my helmet as saline water flooded into the shallow wounds, 
intensifying the pain. Kofi released his hold, and the tethered chair with me taped to it 
jolted and lurched like an amusement park ride until I finally stopped struggling and 
subsided, spent and motionless. Dark little strings of blood oozed slowly from at least a 


dozen small cuts. 

I muttered, "Shit. The suit was brand-new. A genuine Phoque from France. Paid full 
duty, too." 

Kofi chuckled and slipped his knife back into its scabbard. "Yeah. Really sharp-
looking outfit. Oops! Didn't mean to commit a pun." 

"Fuck you, funny man." 

"Hey, no hard feelings. I liked you, Helly, even if you were an ex-cop. We had us 
some good times." He glanced at the dive computer on his wrist. "Well, I guess it's time 
for me to go. I'll rig Pernio to ride out the storm, then come back tomorrow to search for 
my poor lost bud—collect your remains and whatever scuba gear the flapjaws don't scarf 
down. I hope those Corby jetfins survive. Always wanted a pair of those." 

"You lousy shithead," I said bitterly. "You could have told me about Gala's blackmail 
threat. I'd have talked to Matt Gre-goire, had Rampart Internal Security take you to 
another planet and give you a new identity—" 

"I thought about that. Really! I mean, it was okay to earn a little spare change just 
lettin' Elgar know what you were up to during the past couple years, but I had to do some 
heavy thinking when this other dude ordered me to blow you away. Weigh the 
alternatives. If I'd come clean to you, I'd have had to leave K-L. And the place grows on 
you, y'know? With you deceased, I figure I'll take over: Pernio and all your neat stuff. 
Our pals on Eyebrow'll appreciate that you would have wanted it that way." 

Out of the corner of my eye I saw sinister dull red shapes moving through the water. 
The vanguard of the flapjaw demons was zeroing in, drawn by the scent of my 
corpuscles. "Just don't toss my Jimmy Buffet dimes," I croaked. "They're worth a 
bundle." 

"I'll play one of his songs at your funeral," Kofi promised. "How about 'Fins to the 
Right, Fins to the Left'?" 

Laughing merrily, he picked up his discarded speargun, gave me a farewell finger 
waggle, and swam away into the Glory Hole's access shaft. 

Several dozen of the carnivorous piscoids had assembled now and were milling 
around tentatively, crossed eyeballs pooched out in excitement and toothy mouths 
oafishly agape. They were a wee bit suspicious of the alien hemoglobin, but they'd get 
over their inhibitions quickly enough. There were damn good reasons why smart divers 
wore full skinsuits in waters frequented by this species. Flapjaws weren't all that large, 
but they were strong and voracious. One coral scratch on your bare skin and you were 
fish chow. 

The pain of the superficial wounds was rapidly diminishing. Kofi had only cut deep 
enough to draw blood. I strained against my bonds but the tape didn't give a millimeter. 
Good old duct tape ... For two hundred years the stuff has been the best friend of 
plumbers, electricians, mechanics, engineers, sailors, astronauts, householders, and 
billions of other folks desperate for a quick fix. It's very tough—almost impossible for 
human musclepower to burst. You have to tear it, beginning at one edge, or poke a 
starting hole in it with something sharp. But there was nothing near my plastic throne but 
sand and well-worn rock. 

And about thirty flapjaw piscoids with teeth like piranhas, getting ready to sample 
some exotic fast food. 

In time the frigging fish themselves would tear me loose. But by then I'd be a goner. 


Kofi, with careful forethought, had refrained from slicing me anywhere near the wrists or 
the ankles. The demons were going to start feeding on my leaky parts—upper arms and 
thigh muscles, and the soft flesh of my abdomen. Eventually the crazed brutes would 
consume the rest of me, together with my tattered suit and the tape and every other part of 
my rig soft enough for their teeth to handle. 

A single intrepid flapjaw, larger than the others, darted in as fast as lightning and took 
a chomp out of my right shoulder. I balled my fists and screamed, "God!" 

Damned if he didn't answer... sort of. 

My jetfins swooshed as I inadvertently activated the control glove. I flipped over 
violently backward until the chair reached the limit of its twin anchor cords and I was 
almost flat on my back. When I unclenched my left hand the jets cut off and I floated 
back to an upright position. 

The enterprising demon had fled. Its comrades gathered in a nervous huddle at a safe 
distance. 

Well, well. 

I punched the jets again and again, setting myself gyrating crazily, hoping the 
movement would scare the predators away permanently. But after a few minutes they 
seemed to decide there was nothing to worry about and began to close in. I shouted 
obscenities into my helmet, goosed the fins until I bobbed like a toy balloon in a gale, but 
the fish kept coming. 

I savored the irony of it: that which I had planned to have for dinner was shortly to 
dine upon me. 

The attack came abruptly, but this time I had no sense of being bitten. I felt blow after 
stunning blow, as though I were being struck by catapulted rocks. At each impact, the 
demons tore away a bit of my suit. Some of them also took small hunks of meat. I 
bounced and roared as the vicious creatures swirled around me. My blood began to cloud 
the water. I shut my eyes to the horror and howled in brokenhearted desperation. 

And missed seeing my savior arrive. 

But I felt it, a great glancing thump against my left knee that set me twirling. My eyes 
flew open and I saw a sinuous black body squirm about me like a gargantuan serpent. Its 
eyes were shining white and it had a luminous blue head and a streaming golden mane, 
and it was snapping up flapjaw demons like a bull terrier catching butterflies. 

The cometworm had come to my rescue—perhaps out of gratitude, like the lion in the 
fable who saved the life of that Roman slave, what's-his-face, after the guy pulled a thorn 
from the big cat's paw. Or more likely, the worm just had a really serious attack of the 
munchies. 

I began to whoop with hysterical laughter. 

The water around me turned a sickly greenish-brown hue, the color of demonic vital 
fluids mixed with those of humankind. The frenzied cometworm crashed into me again 
and I felt myself drifting laterally, out of the melee. My rescuer had somehow snapped 
the cords holding down the chair. 

I curled the fingers of my left hand. Accelerating, I moved through the murk toward 
one of the larger coral pillars that supported the shelf-reef. Tiny creatures fled at my 
approach, swimming off or withdrawing into crevices in the rock. I let the propulsion 
wedge me firmly into a niche, then wriggled about until my right wrist was in contact 
with a rough coralline peg. I rasped away, enfeebled by shock, and after an interminable 


interval the duct tape confining that arm shredded and came apart. By the time I had freed 
myself completely from the chair, only a few morsels of demon flesh were left bobbing 
about the sandy sea floor, pursued by interested crustaceoids. The cometworm was gone. 

A sweet, deceptive sense of relief flooded through my brain. My willpower had been 
sapped by terror, pain, exsan-guination, and the effort to escape my bonds. I floated 
aimlessly about the Glory Hole, slipping in and out of rational consciousness. A remote 
part of my mind realized that if the upcoming storm caught me under the shelf-reef, the 
surging currents would almost certainly sweep me into some submarine cul-de-sac where 
I'd be trapped and perish. 

I decided that I didn't care. 

Indeterminate time passed. The beauties of the hole surrounded me, and my miseries 
had mercifully faded away. Kofi's treachery was forgotten, as was Eve's desperate plea 
for help, my fear that the Haluk were planning an attack on humanity, and even the fact 
that I might be bleeding to death. In a state of neutral buoyancy, wafting along faceup 
with my arms and legs flaccid, I drifted immediately beneath the hole's main access shaft 
.. . where the water was breathing! 

A faint curiosity roused me from my torpor. The tendrils and other trailing 
appendages of the marine life encrusting the vertical tunnel were alternately sucked 
upward, then downward by increasing wave motion at the surface of the sea. I watched 
the undulant phenomenon in uncomprehending fascination. The bright colors of the 
creatures had faded in spite of my spectrum compensator lens. This vaguely puzzled me, 
but I was too far gone to realize that the sunlight was dimming. I experienced a 
muddleheaded urge to check out the "breathing" more closely and once again activated 
my jetfins. The abrupt thrust propelled me toward the lower rim of the shaft, directly into 
a colony of miniature firecracker spongids. 

Their stinging nematocysts fired and my torn suit was hopelessly inadequate to 
protect me. I felt as though I had been struck by a hundred flaming needles. The sudden 
agony banished my fatal languor and turned me into a convulsing madman, shrieking and 
caroming off the sides of the passageway as my spastic left hand involuntarily turned the 
jetfins on and off. 

Something or other, maybe Providence, finally prompted me to punch the buoyancy 
compensator's emergency ascent pad. Still flailing and shouting, I shot up the shaft to the 
surface, which was less than seven meters above. 

I broached and thrashed about in delirium. Some small functioning part of my mind 
took command, and little by little I forced my body to relax and ride the waves. The pain 
from the spongid venom was excruciating, giving a sensation of being roasted alive. But 
the exploding stingers of the miniature species didn't kill; they only caused slow paralysis 
of the voluntary muscles. 

I had about five minutes to reach Pernio and administer the antidote. After that I'd be 
helpless human flotsam. 

Unexpectedly, as my burning body began to go off-line my woozy brain switched 
back on, with every sense seemingly tuned to preternatural sharpness by sheer agony. 
The wrist computer's chronograph told me it was late afternoon, which surprised the hell 
out of me. I managed to look around. The sea had turned from limpid turquoise to muddy 
olive, the wind had picked up considerably, and clouds were thickening toward the south. 
The storm might be coming in faster than anticipated. A lenticular cloud that resembled a 


flying saucer was perched over the summit of the Devil's Teakettle volcano, another 
indication that the weather was changing for the worse. 

There was no sign of Black Coffee, but Pernio was a reassuring golden speck in the 
distance. If only the water had been deeper, I could have used my dive computer to turn 
on the sub's autopilot and summon it. But that was no option. Even with the tide now at 
its height, the sea around me was still less than four meters deep. 

The reconnaissance had taken only a few moments. In my extremities, the ghastly 
burning sensation was gradually giving way to a more bearable tingling. I clamped my 
arms to my sides and made a tight fist with my left hand. The jets kicked in at max and I 
surged off, head partly out of the water like a charging grampus, crashing through the 
stiff chop. It would have been more efficient to move underwater, but I had a desperate 
urge to keep my yellow submarine in sight. 

Prickly numbness invaded my toes, my fingers, my nose, and my lips. I began to 
consider what I would do after I reached the sub and administered the antivenin to 
myself. Kofi's sub was slower than mine, but he would almost certainly reach Eyebrow 
Cay ahead of me. That was all to the good. He'd phone his Galapharma controller in 
Manukura with news of my putative demise, but I doubted that he'd leave the island. He 
had to be in place to go hunting for my bones tomorrow. I could return home under cover 
of darkness, nab him, do a little rough and ready interrogation, and— 

I was slowing down, with half a kilometer still to go. 

Cursing, I realized that my entire left arm had lost sensation. The damned 
nematocysts had mostly struck that side of my upper body, and the hand wearing the fin 
control glove was almost completely paralyzed. With my right hand I squeezed the 
useless left fingers into a ball. Immediately, my speedy forward progress resumed. But 
weakness was creeping down the good arm as well, and a few moments later I felt its grip 
also failing. 

Shit. I was losing momentum again, and Pernio was still at least two hundred meters 
off. I moved at a snail's pace through the waves, which now bore small foamy crests. My 
right arm functioned, but its fingers were nearly impotent. My feet were full of pins-and-
needles now in what I feared was the prelude to paralysis, while my legs still felt 
relatively normal. 

I was dead in the water again before it occurred to me to thrust my hands into my 
crotch with my last remaining bit of arm strength and press my thighs together. 

The jets reactivated momentarily, then cut out again. Somehow, the inner-finger 
contacts on the glove weren't closing properly. I wriggled my legs, trying to work the 
pinioned hands into an effective position. Both of them fell free, as useless as lumps of 
lead. 

Well, there was always low-tech methodology... until my legs gave out. 

Taking a deep breath of the canned neon-oxygen mix, I lowered my head into the 
water to decrease resistance, turned on the Rolex's navigator, and began scissoring with 
the stiff, heavy fins. In my weakening state it was desperately hard work. The Corbys 
weren't meant for serious muscle-powered swimming and they seemed to weigh ten kilos 
apiece. By now my feet were switched off and I could barely bend my knees, so the 
entire burden of propulsion fell on my thigh muscles. After a few minutes they were 
screaming. I ignored the new onslaught of pain and forged on. 

I made slow progress while the muscle ache steadily worsened, spreading into my 


groin. Even my balls hurt. Was I still bleeding? Kofi certainly hadn't opened an artery, 
and I didn't think the fish had, either. They'd torn my suit to ribbons but I was pretty sure 
that the bites themselves were mostly small. K-L's seawater is mildly astringent, and 
minor wounds will often close spontaneously on an immersed body. I was overdue for 
some good luck and hoped for the best. 

I kept kicking woodenly. With my head underwater, the encouraging view of Pernio 
was lost and I concentrated on the faceplate navigation display. Its tiny sub icon was 
green, the color of safety, while my body was represented by a white blip creeping 
crazily along like a drunken slug. 

Whenever I veered off course, the navigator squeaked at me to signal a correction: 
beebeep for bear right, boop for bear left. At first the incessant boop-beebeep-boop drove 
me nuts; ordinarily, I never used this guidance feature, but I didn't trust myself to swim a 
straight line under the circumstances. After a time the squeaks became mere background 
noise, a dreary counterpoint to my misery that I obeyed automatically. 

The swim was taking forever. The gap between my icon and the sub's seemed to have 
stopped closing. Was I making any headway at all? 

What if the dive computer wasn't working properly? How many times had my right 
wrist smashed into coral rock during my struggles down in the Glory Hole, jolting the 
thing's delicate innards? Surely it wouldn't hurt to break stroke and take a peek above 
water, just to make sure I was traveling in the right direction... 

I didn't dare give in to the temptation. If I knew the real distance I still had to cover, 
rather than the virtual, I might give up in despair. 

Maybe I'd do that anyway! What the hell. I was tired enough to die. 

But I kept on feebly kicking. 

My eyes rebelled against the strain of focusing on the lens display, went bleary, and 
finally drifted shut. I was on total cruise control now. Boop-beebeep. My heart and lungs 
labored in anguished overdrive. The water of Kedge-Lockaby's ocean is warm, but a cold 
feeling was creeping up my thighs now, tagging after the deadly pins-and-needles. My 
face had gone numb. Below my knees there was nothing. Below my shoulders there was 
nothing. I moved slower and slower. 

I wasn't going to make it. 

Never mind, Helly. Remember why you came to K-L in the first place, after they 
threw you out of the ICS. How many times did you aim a "borrowed" sailboard out to sea 
when you were a drunken derelict living on the Big Beach, intending to make an end of 
it? Haifa dozen times, at least! But you always lost your nerve. Tough to deliberately 
decide to die when you're a burnt-out case. But no decisions are necessary now. All you 
have to do is let go... 

You fucking loser. 

That's what my father had called me: a loser. He believed that I'd lost my nerve. 

Was it true? Had I turned my back on Rampart Starcorp because Simon was an idiot 
and I'd done my damnedest before reaching a hopeless dead end ... or was I just ducking 
the challenge, as the old man had said? 

God damn him, expecting me to come to his rescue! Did he stand by me when I was 
up against it during my trial for malfeasance? Fuck if he did. He still believed I was 
guilty of the trumped-up charges. But he'd use me any whichaway if it meant— 

Bonk. 


Oh, Jesus. 

I opened my eyes and saw a freshly painted yellow flexi-hull. I'd kept on kicking 
throughout my incoherent bitch session and I swam right into Pernio's flank. 

Now what? Look, Ma! No hands... 

But the descender platform was still down, a mechanism designed to spare effete 
sport-diving clientele from having to leap ignominiously off the sub into the sea or strain 
tired muscles climbing back out. I hoicked my fanny onto it, tapped the control pad with 
my faceplate frame, and upsy daisy! I was flopping on the aft flat like a gaffed halibut. 
Even though the anchored vessel wallowed in the choppy waves, the stanchions and their 
narrow railing were still deployed so I managed not to fall overboard. 

Kofi had retracted the flybridge, battening down for the storm, but it was easy enough 
to tell the computer to open the main hatch, which was nearly flush with the dorsal 
surface. All I had to do then was maneuver myself over the coaming and descend the 
ladder to the command deck without fracturing some vital part of my anatomy. 

Easily said. I wore large, awkward jetfins, smallish tanks, and a helmet that had 
seemed featherlight when I donned it this morning but now threatened to snap my neck 
with its oppressive weight. There was no helping it: the gear had to come off. 

Getting rid of the fins was easy. I slithered into position on the heaving flat and used 
the leverage of a stanchion to pry the Corbys off, cringing as the expensive things fell 
into the water and sank out of sight. The helmet, attached to the gas tanks and rebreather 
unit by its feed lines, had to come off next. Then I could hit the quick-release buckle on 
the main harness and dump the rest of the equipment that was strapped to my body. 

I squirmed and I rumbled. But no matter how I tried, I was unable to remove the 
headpiece. It was secured by a tenacious neck-hugging skirt of flexible plastic, 
impossible to budge without the use of my paralyzed hands. I briefly considered and 
rejected the notion of discarding the harness and letting the deadweight of the attached 
diving gear pull off the helmet. But the sub was bouncing too violently. I might be 
dragged back into the sea along with the equipment. 

I decided that I had no time left to waste. Rolling to the open hatch, I pulled myself 
into a sitting position and allowed my nearly deadened legs to drop into the opening. The 
ladder was angled slightly. I intended to descend it with my back to the rungs, as though 
it were a flight of steep stairs, performing a sort of jolting slide and praying that the tank 
module didn't get snagged. 

The helmet made it hard to see my insensate feet. When I decided they were resting 
securely on one of the ladder rungs, I started to wriggle downward, arms dangling limply. 
My dying thigh muscles quivered like jelly with the effort of lifting my inert legs, and I 
whacked my backside atrociously at every bump of the descent. 

When I was halfway down, a big wave broke over Pernio and the sudden flood of 
water nearly knocked me off the ladder. Fighting not to panic, I told the computer to 
close the hatch. I reached the bottom miraculously standing on my dead feet, but almost 
immediately the sub rolled. I lost my balance on the wet sole, went sprawling, and 
banged my head so hard on the flybridge enclosure that I knocked myself silly. 

The mishap was a fortuitous one. When I recovered my wits, lying on my stomach, I 
discovered that my chin had somehow popped through the helmet's snug-fitting neck 
seal. With a little more head-bashing and prying against the support of the command seat, 
I was finally able to pull the damned bucket off my head. The tanks and BC fell free 


when I hit the buckle-release against the seat's footrest. 

Centimeter by centimeter I wormed my way to the first-aid locker beneath the 
navigation console, struggled up onto my benumbed knees, and poked the code numbers 
into the simple safety lock with my unfeeling nose. My teeth served to pull out the tray of 
biotoxin antidote self-dosers. I dumped them onto the wet sole, oblivious of sterility 
considerations, collapsed, and rooted around in the heap like a dying pig until I found the 
correct doser. Never mind taking it out of its transparent plastic envelope. I flipped the 
med with my nose so that its explosive injector sleeve faced up, then fell on my face, 
shooting the antivenin into my numb cheek. 

Yes! 

A surge of idiot exultation blazed through me. I was slashed, bashed, semiparalyzed, 
half conscious and running on the fumes. But I was going to recover and make it back to 
Eyebrow Cay. And when I got there, my old friend Kofi Rutherford had better look 
sharp, because his ass was grass and I was the Grim Reaper. 

I waited for the lifesaving drug to kick in, reviewing the situation, considering my 
new options, wondering where I'd stowed my own roll of duct tape. 

 

 

Chapter 3 

 

Fifty-six years ago, in 2176, Galapharma Amalgamated Concern decided that its 
remote Perseus Spur colonies were no longer economical and retreated to the Orion Arm 
of the Milky Way. Seven years later a spunky shoestring outfit called Rampart Interstellar 
Corporation, founded by my uncle Ethan, my father, and their friend Dirk Vanderpost—
my mother's brother—came along and proved that the Concern had made a big fat 
mistake. 

It had been Gala's policy to treat preindustrial alien natives as virtual slave labor. 
Ethan Frost decreed that Rampart would pay the Insaps fairly. In return the Zmundigaim 
folks of Seriphos gave their new human employers a little present that they had kept 
secret from the Gala exploiters: a basket containing a candylike treat they called rozkoz, 
said to "gladden both the mouth and the mind." 

Ethan realized immediately that the confection, more delicious than chocolate, was a 
potential goldmine. It founded the fortunes of Rampart and brought modest affluence to 
the Zmundigaim who chose to work for the Starcorp. 

By 2232, Rampart had claimed and exploited sixty-four of the most resource-rich 
Spur worlds. Its ICS mandate also gave it conditional title to nearly three thousand other 
terrestrial-class planets in the Spur, excepting the handful inhabited by the stargoing 
Qastt and Haluk races, which were off-limits under Statute 44 of the CHW Code. 

Insaps lacking interstellar technology had little to say about human exploitation of 
their territory, whether in the Perseus Spur or in other parts of the Commonwealth. If the 
Earthlings who invaded them were reasonably enlightened— as Rampart was—primitive 
Indigenous Sapients often prospered. But if the encroaching Concern or Starcorp treated 
alien peoples unjustly, they had very little recourse in CHW law. Certain humans, 
including myself, thought this was deplorable; but we were a powerless minority during 
the heyday of the Hundred Concerns. 

The Qastt and the Haluk were not consulted when CHW awarded the vacated Perseus 


Spur Mandate to Rampart. Why should they have been? During the Galapharma 
occupation, the two races refused to trade or even conduct polite diplomatic relations 
with big bad scary humanity. Since the weaponry and ultraluminal transport technology 
of the aliens were inferior to Gala's, the Concern just kissed 'em off. 

The trouble was, they didn't stay kissed for long. Instead they turned pirate, attacking 
vulnerable human starships and raiding the weaker Spur colonies. An armistice, brutally 
forced upon the Qastt and Haluk during the Galapharma years, was still nominally in 
place. In spite of it, depredations by both alien races, officially attributed to 
"uncontrollable lawless elements," had continued virtually unabated throughout 
Rampart's tenancy. 

The diminutive, falsetto-voiced Qastt, who occupied thirty-two Perseus worlds and 
were the most persistent bandits, represented a relatively minor nuisance. 

The allomorphic Haluk were something else altogether, as I'd discovered through 
personal experience. No one trivialized them with droll nicknames. Their hijackings and 
planet raids were always well-planned, ruthless in execution, and targeted toward specific 
high-tech commodities. Currently, they had only eleven outpost colonies in the Spur, but 
they inhabited tens of thousands of other overcrowded planets in a satellite star cluster off 
the Spur's tip. Haluk emigration to the Milky Way Galaxy had been very slow because of 
their primitive interstellar transport system, as well as certain limiting peculiarities of the 
racial physiology. 

Both those problems were in the process of being solved, thanks to egregious 
meddling by Galapharma and certain of its Big Seven allies. 

Of the as yet unclaimed Rampart mandated worlds, 206— including Kedge-
Lockaby—were freesoil human colonies, former wards of Galapharma presently 
governed by the Commonwealth until Rampart chose to move in and assume 
responsibility for the infrastructure of civilization as we know it. The other planets of the 
mandate had no permanent human settlements and were informally classified as 
"wildcat," theoretically wide-open to squatting or plundering, but in actuality too 
inhospitable or economically challenged to attract small-time opportunists. 

CHW Zone Patrol, overworked and underfunded, kept an eye on the freesoil and 
wildcat worlds and tried to prevent any significant incursions by human or alien 
predators. Rampart ExSec was responsible for maintaining law and order on most of the 
Starcorp-settled planets, although a few of the more remote worlds were policed by 
Rampart Fleet Security. 

Under the leadership of the late Ethan Frost, Rampart had flourished and grown 
apace. In fact, it was on the verge of making the quantum leap from Interstellar 
Corporation to Amalgamated Concern, whereupon its growth would have become 
explosive, fueled by venture credit infusions available only to members of the Big Boys 
Club. However, when Uncle Ethan died in 2227 and my father took over the CEO slot, 
the company lost its momentum. Simon had never possessed his older brother's 
entrepreneurial zeal. He lacked the imagination and energy necessary to advance the 
corporate fortunes and he made a number of very bad strategic decisions. 

Among other things, he halted the acquisition of new freesoil planets, cut back on 
new product research and development, was stingy with employee and Small Stakeholder 
benefits, and spent too much on ill-considered marketing schemes designed to give 
Rampart an impressive image that he hoped would dazzle the politicians in Toronto and 


speed the upgrading of Rampart to Concern status. 

Among the worst of Simon's mistakes, to my mind, was his choice of Ethan's son 
Zared to be Rampart's President and Chief Operating Officer. Zed Frost was a very smart 
and charismatic frontman who talked a good game; but when it came down to nitty-gritty 
operating decisions, he was overly conservative, even more cautious than Simon or my 
older brother Dan, Rampart's top legal eagle. Zed's handpicked top management men—
Leonidas Dunne, Chief Technical Officer, and Gianliborio Rivello, Chief Marketing 
Officer-were cut from the same bolt of stodgy cloth. The pair served on the Board of 
Directors and invariably voted along with Cousin Zed. 

A sudden string of costly setbacks and several blatant instances of sabotage turned 
Rampart's stagnation into a genuine downhill slide. It was ripe for a takeover when 
Galapharma made its first tender offer in 2228. Zed, Leo, and Gianni declared themselves 
in favor of the merger. So did Emma Bradbury, Ethan's widow, who controlled 12.5 
percent of the corporate shares, voting them as instructed by her son, Zed. 

The attempt by the colossus to gobble Rampart made Simon's blood boil. He rallied 
opposition among the stakeholders and Gala's initial bid was voted down. 

As time passed and disasters multiplied inside the Star-corp, Simon's principal 
boardroom allies—my brother Dan, Thora Scranton, who was the Small Stakeholder 
mouthpiece, Gunter Eckert, the financial chief, and even my mother, Katje Vanderpost—
began to have second thoughts about the wisdom of linking up with the big Concern. 
Alistair Drummond submitted new offers, sweetening the pot each time and applying 
more and more pressure. 

By the time I came onto the scene in 2232, after Eve's kidnapping, Simon was 
fighting a rearguard action with the Rampart board. He suspected that one or more of 
them might have made an under-the-table deal with the enemy. 

Corroborating that belief was an enigmatic remark that had been made by Gala's late 
assassin, Bronson Elgar, implying that a member of the Frost family—presumably a 
secret Galapharma partisan—was responsible for the diabolical suggestion that Eve be 
demicloned. This pointed strongly to Cousin Zed as the viper in the corporate bosom. He 
certainly had a bitter resentment of my older sister. They were open rivals for the top 
executive position, and Simon had been very nearly ready to promote Eve and repudiate 
Zed at the time of her abduction. 

I had found no firm evidence of treachery by Zared Frost during my own 
investigations, undertaken during the six months following the rescue of Eve from her 
kidnappers. My associate Karl Nazarian, who had been Simon's original head of 
corporate security and knew more about cyberespionage than anyone else in the Perseus 
Spur, had analyzed Zed's spoor within Rampart CorpNet over the previous several years 
and come up with nada. Not even my cousin's open endorsement of the Gala takeover 
proved he was a traitor. He might just as well have been motivated by expediency and 
honest greed as by perfidy. 

The only other thing even remotely suggestive of incrimi-nation was Zed's close 
relationship with the turncoat security Vice President, Oliver Schneider. He'd nominated 
Schneider as Nazarian's successor when the old man decided to retire, and he'd strongly 
supported Schneider when the latter made certain controversial—even disastrous—
security decisions. But Zed seemed to have done so without any devious motives. 

Karl Nazarian had proved Schneider's guilty association with Galapharma by 


following his secret data-trails; but none of those trails had led to the office of Rampart's 
incompetent President and Chief Operating Officer, Zared Frost. 

If only it had been possible to interrogate Zed and Ollie with psychoprobe machines! 
But my cousin's high corporate position made such a fishing expedition inconceivable, 
while Schneider and his four asshole buddies, who'd engineered the campaign of 
subversion and sabotage, were gone with the wind. 

Matilde Gregoire, the former Fleet Security Chief who had taken over Schneider's 
position as VP Confidential Services, had ferreted out a number of other low-echelon 
saboteurs and dirty-tricksters emplaced in various departments of Rampart; but these 
perps knew nothing at all about any upper-level treachery. Machine probing affirmed that 
they were all in the game for the money alone. They had taken their orders directly from 
Schneider's minions and knew nothing about any Gala connection. 

Our attempts to find other material witnesses implicating Galapharma in a conspiracy 
to devalue Rampart had failed. Without them the investigation had reached a dead end. 

Or had it? 

There were still the captive Qastt pirates Eve had mentioned ... and Kofi Rutherford. 

As I lay helpless on my submarine in a pool of blood and seawater, waiting for my 
poisoned nervous system to recover, I did some serious thinking about the new suspects. 

The Squeak buccaneers had an unusual history. Several weeks before Eve's 
kidnapping, they'd got into a firefight with a heavily armed Rampart freighter and were 
forced to surrender. When a human prize crew boarded the Qastt vessel, they discovered 
a Haluk passenger who had just committed suicide. The Squeakers were narrowly 
prevented from destroying the body. 

Now, it was totally unprecedented for Haluk to travel on Qastt starships. The two 
races had almost nothing in common except their hatred of humanity. When the Qastt 
crew were interrogated by Rampart security agents on Nogawa-Krupp, they admitted that 
the Haluk had been on board to broker an instant deal for the Rampart freighter's cargo, 
should the bandits succeed in grabbing it. Subsequently, I discovered which portion of 
that cargo was particularly coveted by the Haluk. It was the obscure genen vector 
PD32:C2, produced only on the Rampart planet Cravat. 

At the time, neither Eve nor the authorities on N-K suspected that the Haluk corpse 
on the pirate ship had any sinister significance. Because this particular alien race was still 
little known to human science, the body was sent to Tokyo University for study. The 
Japanese researchers' findings had been astonishing, providing the first clue to the nature 
of the Haluk's mysterious genetic engineering project. But in no way did the Tokyo data 
implicate Galapharma. The scientists very properly decided to keep their discovery secret 
until the study was completed. 

They'd tried to keep it a secret from Simon, too, but he pried it out with a combination 
of threats and bribery. 

Eve's suggestion to me that the Qastt prisoners might provide a clue linking Gala to 
the Haluk seemed highly unlikely. It was more logical that the Haluk would have told the 
Squeakerinos as little as possible about their reasons for wanting PD32:C2, to keep the 
price down. I'd have to ask Karl Nazarian to reinterrogate the Qastt pirates just in case 
they knew something, but the odds were that they'd be just another dead end. 

Kofi might not be, if he could lead me to the Galapharma agent who'd ordered my 
death. 


It took over an hour for the spongid venom antidote to take effect completely. I was 
up and about even before the paralysis had completely faded, shucking the remnants of 
my skinsuit, standing in a shower screaming my head off as cold and then hot water laved 
my wounds, shooting up with antibiotics and painkiller. My cuts, bites, and bruises were 
numerous and picturesque, but not as serious as I had feared. I found everything I needed 
to treat them in Pernio's well-stocked meds locker. 

When the doctoring was done, I dressed in a set of sweats and rain gear, cranked up 
the flybridge, and started the sub's engines. I'd have to take her out of the dangerous 
shallows running on the surface—and do a damn quick job of it. The first rain squall of 
the approaching tropical depression now lashed the waves with gale-force winds, and the 
old boat wallowed like a drunken sow, as she always did riding topside in rough seas. 

Finally we reached a safe depth. I went below again and submerged, and the chaos of 
the storm vanished miraculously. Pernio picked up twenty knots of headway. I fed the 
course into the MFCS, engaged the autopilot, and went to my bunk. 

I'd intended to sleep during the three hours it would take to get home, but my damned 
imagination wouldn't let me. I brooded about what I was going to have to do to Kofi. 
Then I thought with growing dismay about Eve's overly optimistic notion that she and I 
could save the Starcorp by dint of fancy footwork that would impress the ICS Status 
Review Board. 

It wouldn't happen. Not unless we could nail Galapharma to the wall before the 
crucial six weeks were over—that is, come up with evidence that would justify 
immediate and massive legal action against it. 

Alistair Drummond wouldn't sit quietly by, watching Rampart straighten up and fly 
right under a new regime. If Eve and I openly took command and somehow made 
Rampart look good to the ICS, Drummond would have no choice but to accelerate his 
assault to a red-line pitch. He'd destroy Rampart rather than let it slip out of his grasp, 
because the takeover was no longer a mere matter of profiteering. 

Galapharma's own survival, and that of its Big Seven allies, was at stake. 

The more I thought about this angle, the more certain I became. Sending Kofi to kill 
me had been a bizarre step smacking of panicky improvisation. I'd been working on 
Seriphos for months, vulnerable to professional hit men, and yet Gala had done nothing. 
That Alistair Drummond was actually worried about the prospect of my rejoining 
Rampart as Chief Operations Officer seemed ridiculous on the face of it; but try as I 
might, I couldn't figure any other motive for a sudden attack by an amateur killer. It only 
made sense if Drummond felt he was engaged in a desperate holding action that he could 
not afford to lose. 

In her eagerness to have me consent to her plan to save the family farm, Eve had 
discounted what we'd learned in the caverns of Cravat from a pathetic woman named 
Emily Blake Konigsberg, the former lover of Alistair Drummond. Emily's story had been 
almost beyond belief, but Matt Gregoire and I had both seen the proof of it with our own 
eyes. 

And Eve herself was living proof. 

This is what Konigsberg had told us: 

When the Galapharma CEO cast avaricious eyes on the Perseus Spur, he had a greater 
goal in mind beyond simply getting back the valuable properties that his predecessors had 
foolishly let slip away. Drummond envisioned a vast new market among the teeming 


Haluk, whose star-cluster boasted an abundance of valuable ultraheavy elements—a 
market not only for the drugs and biologicals of Galapharma, but also for the products of 
Bodascon, Sheltok, Homerun, and Carnelian Concerns. Which Galapharma would 
broker, for a stiff percentage of the take. 

Emily started it all. 

Until she convinced him otherwise, Alistair believed, like everyone else, that the 
Haluk were a hopelessly treacherous and xenophobic lot who nursed an implacable 
hatred of more scientifically advanced humankind. Emily Konigsberg, who was an 
academic of distinguished reputation and naive idealism, had made a special study of the 
Insaps of the Perseus Spur. She persuaded her lover that the antagonism between 
humanity and the Haluk was rooted in misunderstanding, together with a tragic envy by 
the aliens of our more efficient racial biology. 

Together, Emily and Alistair conceived a daring strategy that they were certain would 
win the Haluk over... and generate colossal profits for Galapharma and its allies as a 
felicitous side effect. Never mind that it was highly illegal for a nongovernmental 
organization—even one of the mighty Big Seven Concerns—to negotiate a secret pact 
with an alien race, bypassing the Commonwealth Assembly. The two conspirators 
believed that if CHW was faced with a successful fait accompli, it would be forced to 
grant retroactive approval to a project so objectively worthy. 

And so advantageous to Big Business. 

Armed with conditional offers of support from four other members of the Big 
Seven—Omnivore, the food and beverage colossus, was not invited to join the cabal 
because the aliens didn't favor human comestibles, while the Chairman of Macrodur was 
a notorious straight arrow who couldn't be trusted to place his bottom line above his 
moral principles— Drummond's agents presented the proposal to the Haluk leadership. In 
exchange for enormous quantities of unhex-octon, unhexseptine, and other transactinide 
treasure, Galapharma pledged to set aside no less than fifteen hundred terrestrial-class 
Perseus Spur planets for Haluk colonization, said worlds to be delivered when the 
expected Gala takeover of Rampart was accomplished. In advance of that, as a supreme 
gesture of good faith, Emily and a team of other Galapharma scientists would assist the 
Haluk with a certain complex genetic engineering project that the aliens deemed crucial 
to their racial destiny. The human assistance came at a high price, which went without 
saying, but the Haluk eagerly accepted. 

The genen aspect of the scheme had gone into operation about four years ago. 
Participation by the four other big Concerns followed later, as Drummond demonstrated 
the enormous profit potential of Haluk trade. Bodascon supplied top-of-the-line starships 
that were needed by the Haluk to step up emigration from their home star-cluster. Sheltok 
provided advanced fuel additives needed to propel the vessels, as well as energy 
generators and force-field projectors. Home-run sold heavy equipment and machinery 
that the aliens required to upgrade their industrial base. Carnelian supplied a wide variety 
of robotics, sophisticated communications equipment, and electronic controls. 

The grand conspiracy had worked beautifully ... until I came along with my unlikely 
crew of spoilers and threw a monkey wrench into the works on the planet Cravat. Emily 
Konigsberg had died there, trying to escape an underground holocaust. The Haluk genetic 
engineering project she had supervised, a crucial component of the secret trade deal, went 
up in smoke along with her. 


Drummond and his cabal were undoubtedly hard at work attempting to repair the 
damage. But it seemed certain that none of those corporate hotshots had the least notion 
that the xenophobic, needy Haluk might have other goals in mind besides upgrading their 
inconvenient physiology, finding a little Lebensraum, and taking care of business. 

I now had a pretty good inkling of the awful truth. But since no one in authority 
would listen to me, I was merely a Throwaway version of Chicken Little, yammering that 
the sky was about to fall. 

In my present depressed and frustrated mood, I was damn near ready to let it. 

Only maybe not quite yet. 

When Pernio made a cautious passage through the surf-pounded reef of Eyebrow 
Cay, the lights on shore were barely visible in the torrential downpour. I didn't want to tie 
up at the marina, in case Kofi was still on his boat. There was also a chance that he'd be 
spending the stormy evening hoisting a few with the gang in the back of the general store, 
where Billy Mulholland operated a shebeen that purveyed alcoholic cheer as well as 
espresso drinks and simple pub food. 

I moored my sub in the lagoon just outside the cove where I lived and went jouncing 
ashore in the inflatable. I was wearing a rainsuit with a fanny pack full of necessary stuff 
buckled over it. My dive knife in its scabbard was hidden beneath the jacket. Wind roared 
through the trees like a stampede of Brahma steers, and the surging sea nearly reached the 
steps of my house; but the shack was on high pilings, like most of the other island 
dwellings, and safe enough from most of the local weather. As I reached the top of the 
rocky rise that separated Kofi's place from mine I saw a glimmer of light among the 
thrashing palms and fingerwoods and gave a satisfied grunt. He was probably home. 

There was no need for a cautious approach with the storm making such a racket so I 
just stole up his front steps. They sagged alarmingly. Like the rest of the tumbledown old 
building, they were rapidly biodegrading. Kofi had the shutters lowered on the windows 
facing the raging sea. I went around the open deck to the side of the house and peeked in. 
There was my treacherous bud, taking his ease in a ratty old recliner before the television. 
A nice fire was burning in his glass-door Franklin stove. He hadn't gotten around to 
fixing the leaky roof, having killed the day (so to speak) with me, and a bucket was set 
out to catch drips. He had a brew in one hand and the remote in the other. The screen on 
the wall was showing previews from the Purple Pipeline featuring frisky ladies doing 
unlikely things to one another. 

I crept back to the front of the place and began to pound on the door and shout in a 
strangled, high-pitched voice. "Kofi! Open up, it's Mimo! Help me, for God's sake!" 

The door suddenly flew open. I stood out of arm's reach. The rainjacket's hood hid my 
face. I teetered from side to side like a sick old man. 

Kofi said, "What the fuck?" 

I whimpered, "Ayudame, amigo!" and took a faltering step backward. 

As he came out the door, I straightened and brought up my right fist in a short, 
wrecking-ball uppercut that took him square on the chin. Any ordinary guy would have 
gone down like a sack of sand. (Any ordinary embezzling accountant would have gone 
lullaby for a week!) But Kofi Rutherford just rocked on his pins, gave a bellow of rage, 
and tried to envelop me in a rib-crushing bear hug. I thumb-fisted him in the balls. He 
leapt back screeching and landed a solid blow to my left eye. 

We danced around and I charged him with a body block. The two of us crashed to the 


rough boards of the deck and rolled about, grappling and howling, neither one daring to 
release his grip on the other. He got hold of my ears and pounded my head into the floor. 
I broke his pinky finger. Roaring with pain, he nevertheless trapped me in a headlock. I 
turned my face into the crook of his elbow to stave off strangulation, raked his flesh with 
my nails through the thin fabric of his T-shirt, caught him with my legs in a scissor lock, 
and rolled. We cannoned against the deck railing, and the half-rotten supports snapped 
like matchsticks. Still clamped together, we went over the edge and fell more than two 
meters. The rain-hardened sand was like plascrete. 

I landed on top, but even so, the impact stunned me. Kofi woofed and was still. I lay 
there for a minute or two, then felt him stir beneath me. He began to mumble, "Ah shit ah 
shit ah shit." It was black as midnight under an iron skillet and pouring fit to drown a 
frog. 

I found Kofi's north end from the noise he was making, fitted my hands around his 
throat, and was pressing my thumbs into his jugular when he gurgled, "Quits! Quits! 
Fuckin' leg's broke. Something wrong with my arm, too." 

I eased on the strangling a mite. "If you're lying—" 

"Get off me and see for yourself. I ain't going nowhere." 

"Don't move!" Still sprawled on top of him, I groped for the small flashlight I carried 
in my fanny pack and turned it on. A portion of the smashed railing lay beneath us, 
partially driven into the sand. He moaned as I slithered off his body. I drew my knife 
from its sheath, let him see it in the beam of the flashlight and said, "I'm gonna get up." 

"Yeah, yeah." His left leg was bent at the knee in an unnatural way, either broken at 
the joint or badly dislocated. His left forearm, flung wide, was lacerated and bleeding, 
pierced by a splinter the size of a bayonet. He reached across his chest with the other 
hand, the one with the broken finger, touched the wood shakily, and cursed. 

Struggling to my knees, I took stock of myself. One of my eyes was swelling shut. 
There was a throbbing knot at the back of my skull. I tasted salty blood from a split lip 
and my ears were on fire. My jacket had come unsnapped and blood was smeared all over 
the front of me, probably from old shoulder wounds that had torn open. My bones 
seemed to be intact. 

I said, "What's the name of the guy who told you to kill me?" 

His eyes were fixed on the illuminated knife in my hand and he sneered. "What? You 
gonna start cutting me open if I don't confess?" 

"I need a description and his phone code at the Big Beach." 

Kofi ran his tongue around the inside of his mouth, spat out something, and muttered, 
"Shee-it. You damn near knocked my teeth out with that sucker punch." 

"Tell me about the contact." 

His face twisted in agony and he shuddered. When he finally spoke, his voice was full 
of sad surprise. "Y'know? I think I'm really fucked, man. Hurt like hell inside." 

"Where?" 

"Left. Maybe broken ribs. You came down hard on me, but I traded you some. Should 
see your face!" A soft giggle. He squeezed his eyes shut as another spasm of pain washed 
over him. To my surprise, he asked, "How you doing?" 

"Okay. You broke my fall." 

"That, too?" He took a ragged breath, then flashed me a bloodstained grin. "You're 
somethin' else, Hel. Know that? Dodged the sea toad, got rescued off that damned comet, 


bisected ol' Bron Elgar like a bagel out there on Cravat... How the hell you get away from 
those damn fish down in the Glory Hole? Man, you got more lives than a New York 
alleycat." 

"The name," I repeated. I brought the blade down in front of his eyes, keeping the 
flashlight on his face. Falling drops bounced and beaded on the bright metal. His dark 
cheeks were streaming. There were tears mixed with the rainwater. I said, "Please, Kofi." 

"Hey, now!" He gave a crazy kind of laugh and winced at the effort. "Interrogating 
the suspectpo-litely! You crazy? Go ahead—start slashing! Carve me like a pork roast. I 
deserve it, right?" 

"All I want is the information." 

"Don't wanna do the torture thing? Not even a teensy bit of revenge? Get some 
satisfaction for the way I sold you out, poked holes in you, wouldn't even let you die easy 
down in the hole? Come on, make me talk. See if you can!" 

I held the knifepoint a few millimeters above his right eyeball. "Tell me, Kofi." 

"You gonna do it," he whispered, "do it!" 

For a long time I didn't move. Then I withdrew the blade, replaced it in its sheath, sat 
back on my heels and stared at him. The rain cascaded down on us. Waves were 
thundering on the rocks below Kofi's house, and the leaves of the alien trees clattered in 
the fury of the gale. I was soaked to the skin in spite of my rainsuit. I'd lost one sea boot. 
My wound collection ached like blue blazes and I had dribbled blood all over the broken 
man lying on the sand. 

"Do it!" Kofi screamed. 

"Shut up." 

I undipped my fanny pack, rummaged, found the phone and tried it. The case was 
cracked. The thing was dead as a chunk of corned beef. "Is your phone up in your 
house?" 

The sound he made was half a sob. He writhed, trying to pull his arm off the impaling 
splinter. "Left it... on the boat to charge. House charger unit fritzed out. I was gonna ask 
Oren to fix it." 

"Terrific. Lie still." 

I'd have to go back to my place to get help. The nearest Medic Unit was on 
Gingerbread Island, over three hundred kilometers away. I thought it might be better to 
fly Kofi over in Mimo's speedy Garrison hopper rather than wait for an evacuation, but 
he'd have to be stabilized first. 

I used the flashlight to find my missing footgear and gather loose deck palings that 
would serve for splints. The arm would be a tricky job for somebody whose first-aid 
skills were as rusty as mine. That dagger of wood couldn't be left in place, but he'd 
probably bleed like a son of a bitch when I removed it. I dragged as much of the shattered 
railing out from under Kofi as I could and then shed my rainjacket. The knife served to 
slice off one of the long sleeves of my sweatshirt. I chopped the thick cloth into pieces. 

"Can you hold the flashlight?" I asked him. 

He took it. "About that button man on the Big Beach—" 

"To hell with him." I took the roll of duct tape out of my pack. 

"What you gonna do with that?" 

"Boy Scout stuff." 

A despairing chuckle. "Why bother? You think I'm dog shit." 


"Wrong. I think you're guppy shit." 

"Hah! I know why you can't torture me, muthahfuckah. Because it'd lower you to my 
scumbag level. You're a Boy Scout for real! Can't stand soilin' your lofty moral 
principles—" 

"I've got to lift this arm off the wooden spike poked through it. It'll hurt. I'll try to be 
quick." 

As I did the job, he yelled, "Shiiiit!" and dropped the flashlight. 

I caught it and held it in my mouth. Blood was pouring from both ends of the 
puncture but I didn't see any strong arterial spurting. I held the pressure point in the bend 
of his elbow until the flow eased, simultaneously clamping wads of cloth over the holes. I 
really needed another hand. I could feel at least one broken bone moving inside the lower 
arm. Blood continued to ooze slowly as I wrapped it firmly with the wide tape and 
applied a splint. 

"Now I'm going to cut your shirt and check your side." 

Kofi spoke in a faint, strained voice. "Can't you do this... repair work someplace dry? 
Feel like I'm freezin'." 

"Soon." 

He cried out weakly as I felt along his side. There was no external wound and it was 
impossible for me to see any bruising on the dark wet skin. "You feel ribs grating in 
there? Take a breath." 

"Yeah .. . Jesus, it's bad, Helly." 

"Right. I'm too wrecked myself to carry you into the house, but in a minute I'll be able 
to drag you underneath it, out of the weather. First I have to do a quickie splint on the leg. 
Here, cover up with my jacket. Keep the rain off you at least." 

"Too. .. damn nice." 

His voice was barely audible now and his eyes had glazed. He was probably going 
into shock. God knew what was busted inside him besides the ribs. Maybe his spleen or 
his liver. Could be internal bleeding. 

Working as quickly as I could, I immobilized his leg between two slats and wrapped 
the result with duct tape. More of the sticky silver stuff secured his wounded arm to his 
chest, slingwise. I ignored the broken pinky finger. That was the least of his problems. 

 

After hauling him to the driest spot beneath his shack, I limped up the stairs and 
collected bedding, a plastic tarp, and a big lantern. When I returned with the stuff, his 
skin had turned the color of clay. I cut off his wet clothing as best I could and swathed 
him with the blankets. His eyes opened. 

"Helly." 

"Don't talk. I'm going to my place and—" 

"The guy... name he used was Lee. Garth Wing Lee. Oriental, one-seventy-five 
centimeters, stringy build, maybe martial artist, long black hair in a tail, ultra clearcut 
threads. Staying .. . Alhambra Lagoon, Bungalow 40. But he was leaving K-L. Maybe 
already . . . gone." 

After pulling the blankets closer around his head, I arranged the tarp in a kind of tent, 
tucked under him, to keep wind-blown rain and spindrift at bay. "Thanks, pal. I'll check it 
out." 

"Gone," he repeated. Then he was still. 


It didn't register. But of course I was in pretty shitty shape myself by then. I finished 
fumbling with the tarp and said, "Hang in there. Be right back." 

His mouth hung slack. The eyes in the gray face were wide open, their pupils dilated 
to onyx circles. I felt for a pulse in his neck but found nothing. 

Should I have tried CPR? No use, given the circumstances. 

And besides, I wasn't that much of a Boy Scout. 

 

 

Chapter 4 

 

Back at my place, I called the Alhambra Lagoon Hotel on the Big Beach. Citizen 
Garth Wing Lee had indeed checked out, not quite an hour earlier. By now he was either 
at the starport or hightailing it into the void. It was futile for me to think of going after 
him, given my state of physical decrepitude. Only one person could help me now. 

Jake Silver is the Superintendent of Kedge-Lockaby's small Public Safety Force. 
Prior to my temporary rehabilitation, he was the only one on K-L who knew the true 
identity of the hapless beach bum called Helmut Icicle. On several occasions he prevailed 
upon me to share my special expertise in corporate-style criminality. We had become 
warily chummy. Cranky, ponderous, and on the wrong side of fifty, he is much too tough 
and intelligent to be running a twenty-ofricer dog and pony show on an insignificant 
planet in the back of beyond. I figured that somewhere, sometime, he had made some 
important enemies. 

Just like me. 

"It's Helly Frost over on Eyebrow Cay," I said, as he picked up my call. The poor guy 
is on duty ten hours a day. "Do me a swift and enormous favor. This is no joke! See if 
one Garth Wing Lee has departed Manukura Starport, and if so, via what." I rapped out 
the physical description. "If the guy is still landside, have your special weapons team take 
him down with a stun. He's extremely dangerous and he might try to self-destruct." 

"Mother-o'-pearl!" Jake drawled. "You're not home a week yet, and already you're 
throwing your weight around. May I remind you that you're Thrown Away and no longer 
a facecard Rampart exec to whom I must bow and tug my graying forelock?" 

"Jake, there's no time for bullshit. Lee could be another Bronson Elgar. One of my 
friends is dead because of him and I had the crap beat out of me. You gotta pull this 
fucker in." 

" 'Gotta' is not a word I want to hear from you, Hell-Butt." 

The Throwaway population of the Out Islands lives and dies beyond the jurisdiction 
of Commonwealth Public Safety authorities. Undertaking a hazardous collar on behalf of 
Rampart Starcorp is not a top priority of the freesoil constabulary, either. 

"Do it, Jake, for chrissake!" 

After a long pause he said, "I'll get back to you," and cut off. 

I carried the phone into the bathroom so I could take another hot shower, pop more 
painkiller, and treat the latest damage to my long-suffering carcass. The right eye was 
reddish black and almost swollen shut. I pricked the contused flesh with bruise-diffuse 
and tied coldpacks over the shiner and the lump on my occiput by knotting a blue 
bandanna around my head, making me look like a cartoon Captain Kidd. The split lip 
needed AB and a strip of Novepiderm. So did the reopened wounds and my lacerated 


knuckles. My scarlet ears benefited from anti-inflammatory salve. 

While I struggled into a fresh set of loose-fitting sweats, I debated whether to collapse 
on the bed and pass out immediately or get a glass of milk and some snickerdoodle 
cookies first to raise my cellar-dwelling blood sugar and calm my queasy stomach. I 
hadn't eaten since breakfast but I had no appetite. Being on the receiving end of 
mayhem'll do that to you. 

The phone buzzed before I sorted out a decision. 

"Jake?" I inquired. 

But it was Mimo Bermudez. His dinner invitation had slipped my mind completely. I 
apologized. "It turned out to be a dismal day on the water, hombre. Sorry, but I wasn't 
able to bring back any flapjaws for you to cook." 

"There's plenty of other food I can prepare for us. You must come over, Helly. The 
business associate I told you about this morning is here and very anxious to meet you." 

"I'm really whacked and not very hungry. Much as I'd like to chat with your 
colleague—" 

"He has vital information for you. If you're too tired to eat, then so be it. But you must 
hear what this man has to say. We'll come to your house." 

"No!" I interposed hastily. "Give me a few minutes and I'll be right over." I severed 
the connection, moaning. I felt like I had one foot in the grave and another on a banana 
peel. There were gory clothes all over the place and the floor was bloody, too. No way 
was I going to explain to Mimo what had happened to Kofi and me. Not in front of some 
stranger. 

Plodding back into the bathroom, I treated myself to a stimulant. I still felt terminal. 
The rainsuit was a mess so I put on an old yellow slicker and sneakers without laces and 
shambled out into the storm. When I knocked on Mimo's door, he opened immediately. 

"Come in! Let me take your coat and get you a drink—" He surveyed my visible 
dings. "Madre de dios, what have you done to yourself?" 

"It's a long story and I'd really rather not go into it just now. A neat shot of Jack 
would be great." 

I followed him into his study. Blazing logs crackling in the hearth were the only 
source of light. Sprawled on the sofa in front of the fire was the guest, an enormously fat 
man with dead white skin. Either he was unaware that gross obesity can be treated by 
metabolic tweaking, or else he was one of those weirdos who take perverse satisfaction in 
cultivating corpulence. 

Given the rest of his appearance, it had to be Option B. 

His hair, which was teased into an intricate beehive, his eyebrows, and his bushy 
beard were an improbable buttercup color. He wore a tentlike garment that resembled a 
crazy quilt stitched together from countless scraps of expensive fabric: velvets, satins, 
brocades, lace, leathers, even bits of tapestry, trapunto work, and see-through tulle 
embroidered in gold and silver. Black leather cuffs bulging with little closed cases were 
clasped about his pudgy wrists. The nails of his oddly slender fingers were filed to sharp 
points and painted black, and he wore a multitude of jeweled rings. The feet of the 
grotesque apparition, absurdly small and dainty, were shod in Aladdin boots with turned-
up tips. An ornate chain around his neck bore a tiny gold-plated Davis DM-22 derringer 
pistol as a pendant. 

Mimo said, "Helly, may I present my former business associate, Captain Zygmunt 


Cybulka. Ziggy, this is Asahel Frost." 

The seated personage made no attempt to shake hands. He smirked at me, showing 
discolored pointy fangs, and raised one of my friend's crystal tumblers, half full of amber 
liquid, in a mocking salutation. 

"I'm glad you could join us after all. I did come to see you at considerable 
inconvenience." He chuckled throatily, a sound like pebbles pouring onto a bass drum. 
"But Mimo assures me that I will be generously reimbursed." 

What the hell? 

Mimo held up a bottle of bourbon. "I'm afraid I have no Jack Daniel's. Ziggy was 
kind enough to bring me a gift of Maker's Mark Limited Edition from his latest import 
shipment." 

"I'll manage to gag it down," I said. It was probably the best American whiskey in the 
known universe. 

He poured me a snort of the magnificent booze and I lowered myself into one of the 
cushioned wicker chairs and sipped. It warmed my gullet all the way down, pooled ig-
neously in my empty stomach and seeped into my veins, bringing blessed ease. Rain 
pelted the snuggery's windows and the surf sounded like rhythmic cannon fire. 

"You look somewhat the worse for wear, Citizen Frost," remarked Captain Zygmunt 
Cybulka. 

"I'm just fine. Small accident on my boat. You may as well call me Helly. I'm not a 
citizen any longer." 

Cybulka expelled another rattling laugh. "A temporary setback, I'm sure, my dear 
Helly. I can't believe that your illustrious family would allow you to remain 
disenfranchised for long." 

I was not in the mood to trade small talk with creepy low-lives. My pal Mimo was an 
honorable sort of outlaw, but cop's instinct told me that this "associate" of his was 
crooked enough to have to screw on his socks. "Do you have something to tell me, 
Captain Cybulka? I'm tired and I want to go to bed." 

"Call me Ziggy. I have interesting information for you, but I do not intend to 
vouchsafe it gratis." 

Mimo said to him quietly, "The two million is yours if the tip pans out. You know I'm 
good for it." 

What? 

The eyes under their shaggy yellow brows were small and reptilian. They darted back 
and forth between me and Mimo. Then Cybulka seemed to come to a decision and 
nodded. "In the course of my business travels throughout the Spur, 1 happened to see a 
parked starship designated RES-1349—" 

"The ExSec cutter Schneider stole!" I croaked. "Where?" 

The fat man went on as though I hadn't interrupted. "An acquaintance of mine said 
that the vessel had been there for a long time. Its dockage fees were paid up to date, 
however. I was told that five individuals had been escorted from the ship and off the port 
premises by a highly placed local official. My confidant had no way of knowing what 
became of the cutter crew after that. They may still be on the planet or they may not be. I 
departed at once and headed here at top speed, notifying Mimo of my intent to claim his 
reward." 

I jumped to my feet, pain and fatigue forgotten. "My God—it must be Schneider! But 


how could our sweep have missed a ship parked in plain sight?" 

Zygmunt Cybulka's face bore a self-satisfied simper. "Easily. You looked in all the 
right places, ignoring the wrong ones." 

I stared at Mimo, who shrugged and said, "While Rampart and Zone Patrol mounted 
their search, I spread the word amongst... los bajosfondos de la sociedad, requesting that 
they keep their eyes open. I took the liberty of offering a generous gratuity." 

"So where is the cutter?" I plopped down again. 

"On a Qastt planet!" Cybulka quivered in seismic glee. 

"Surely you jest." This was crazy. The fugitives might conceivably have gone to a 
Haluk world with the connivance of Galapharma, but hardly one belonging to the 
Lilliputian brigands. 

"I saw the vessel with my own eyes." The fat man's voice was suddenly level and as 
cold as ice. 

According to the terms of CHW Statute 44, human star-ships were forbidden to 
approach even the outermost perimeters of Qastt or Haluk solar systems without 
permission from the aliens. Which was never granted—except to shady operators such as 
the plethoric captain. 

"From time to time I undertake commercial transactions with the Squeakers," he 
continued. "Dreadfully devious and high-strung little sods, but they do have an insatiable 
appetite for certain recreational narcotics. I condescend to supply their needs when it suits 
my schedule. Imagine my surprise when I visited—hem!—a world of theirs and saw the 
missing Rampart External Security ship." 

"Which Qastt world?" I asked. 

An intriguing idea lurked coyly at the threshold of my mind. There were numbers of 
Qastt planets in the vicinity of Cravat, source of the coveted genen vector PD32:C2, but 
the nearest Haluk colony was nearly seven hundred light-years distant. What if the Haluk 
had set up a genetic engineering facility on a Qastt world for the sake of convenience? 
We already knew that they had other operations besides the very specialized one on 
Cravat. Knowing what I did about their grand demorphing scheme, I figured there might 
be excellent political reasons for them to site the facilities outside their own colonies. 

And Ollie Schneider and his lads might be usefully employed there, until the heat was 
off. 

"Which Qastt world?" I repeated. 

"Two million," the drug-runner crooned, "was the posted reward." 

"Rampart Starcorp will give you half the amount immediately," I said, gritting my 
teeth. "You'll get the balance when we confirm the presence of the stolen cutter on the 
Squeak planet. I'll call Rampart Central on Mimo's SS com right now and arrange for the 
transfer of funds. Just give me your account code." 

"Make it a blind draft," Ziggy said crisply. He opened one of the small compartments 
on his left cuff and handed me an EFT card. "And I want all of it now." 

Mimo broke in. "Helly, I was the one who offered the reward—" 

I rounded on him. "Rampart will pay. If this overfed scag-peddler really has the 
goods." 

Cybulka chortled. "Oh, I do. Two million immediately, or I take my business 
elsewhere. I'm sure there will be other interested bidders." 

I surged to my feet and grabbed a fistful of patchwork caftan. "Don't you play games 


with—" 

He tapped one of my arms casually with his right leather cuff. A few thousand volts 
sparked from a concealed laser electrode into my frayed nervous system. I flew backward 
and crashed to the floor on my hypersensitive contused ass. 

"Three million," said Ziggy, tossing off the contents of the crystal tumbler. 

I disparaged his sexuality and that of his mother in hackneyed terms. 

He cocked his head roguishly. "Do I hear four?" 

Mimo helped me into a chair and murmured, "Let me take care of this. He means 
what he says." 

I hissed, "Dammit, Meem, why the hell didn't you tell me what you were doing?" 

"The odds were very long and I couldn't risk Matt Gre-goire or Karl Nazarian 
interfering." He eyed Cybulka. "Or putting pressure on my more skittish underworld 
contacts." 

"Fuckin 'A," averred the fat man. He poured more whiskey from the bottle that sat on 
the low table before the fire and smiled at me benignly. "I forgive your impulsive 
behavior, Helly. It's plain that you've had a bad day. The information is yours for three 
million: two as a down payment, and the balance upon verification." 

I asked Mimo, "How can we be sure this joker isn't just shining us on? And that he 
won't pull a double cross?" 

"Ziggy would not dream of lying to me." Mimo Bermudez regarded his former 
colleague as though he were something he had just scraped from his sandal. "Nor would 
he entertain any thought of warning the Qastt of our interest, or speak of this delicate 
affair to anyone else." 

"No, indeed." Cybulka's voice had lost its archness. "I'm too fond of living." 

There was a silence. Not for the first time, I wondered about my courtly friend, 
Guillermo Javier Bermudez Obre-gon, semiretired Smuggler King of the Perseus Spur. 

I said, "Okay, Ziggy. I apologize sincerely for doubting you and for the roughhouse. 
You get all the money up front tonight. Now which Qastt planet did you see the Rampart 
ship on?" 

"Dagasatt, about one hundred ninety lights from Nogawa-Krupp." 

Yes—and only thirty or so from Cravat! 

Cybulka went on. "The cutter is docked at an auxiliary starport near a city called 
Taqtaq, on the edge of a conspicuous landform called the Great Bitumen Desert. But 
don't ask me to take you there! That's not part of our bargain. As I said, my boy, I'm fond 
of living." 

"What kind of world is Dagasatt?" I asked. 

"Ugly, but clean. No inoculations required. Imagine a desert, scads of sand, but with 
plenty of water available beneath the surface. No resources we could possibly be 
interested in. It's a very old Qastt colony, but a planet that only xenos could love." 

He burbled on about the uncongeniality of the wee aliens, but I wasn't listening. An 
idea had burst into my mind like a supernova. Maybe it was impossible for Rampart 
Security or Zone Patrol ships to land on a Qastt planet, but I had a notion how the trick 
might be managed. 

"Mimo, can I use your SS to call Eve right now? She can authorize Cybulka's 
payment draft by spinning some yarn to Simon. It may take a few hours—" 

"Let me suggest a simpler solution. I'll advance the amount to Ziggy now, and you 


can have Rampart reimburse me at your convenience." 

"A splendid idea, Mimo!" The fat man levitated out of his chair as though he were 
inflated with helium or wore an anti-grav jockstrap. He presented the EFT card to my 
friend with a flourish. "I intend no offense, but the inclement weather of Kedge-Lockaby 
is really not to my taste, and I have urgent business back on dear old Callipygia. So if you 
don't mind—" 

The phone in my pocket buzzed and I started like a goosed moose. "Excuse me. I was 
expecting an important call." 

I lumbered out of the room, tapped the Open pad, and whispered, "Yes." 

"Your chum Garth Wing Lee had a very impressive private cruiser waiting at the 
starport," Jake Silver said. "A Bodascon Y700 prototype. Groundcrew never saw one like 
it before. It must be even faster than the souped-up crate your Mexican bootlegger pal 
flies." 

"Shit. Well, thanks anyway for—" 

"The cruiser was still at the fueling bay when my team arrived. They found Citizen 
Lee in the general astrogation office, calling the cashier impolite names because her card 
reader was malfunctioning and she was having difficulty completing a manual transaction 
of the fuel sale." 

"You had her stall!" I yipped joyously. "Did your team nab Lee?" 

"The subject is resting in the port authority lockup, out colder than a frozen wonton. 
You owe me a big one." 

"Superintendent, start making out your Christmas list." 

"Hanukkah list," he corrected. 

"Whatever. Listen—" 

"No, you listen up, Hell-Butt! I want this schmuck and his ship off my world ASAP. 
As far as CHW is concerned, Lee was never here. We both know he's Concern-
connected, and I don't need any fallout from high places. Get on Mimo's SS and tell 
Rampart Security to collect Lee without any fuss." 

"Meet you at the port lockup in about ninety minutes. I'll take care of everything 
personally when I get there." 

"I was afraid you'd say that." He punched out. 

Leaning against the wall, I let loose with a jubilant "Yee-haw!" 

Mimo popped out of the study, aghast. I lowered my voice. "More good news! I'll fill 
you in later. Can I prevail on you to give me a ride to the Big Beach?" 

"Certainly. I was returning Ziggy to his ship there anyway." 

The drug dealer, wreathed in smiles, was donning a rain poncho the si/e of a 
bedspread. I presumed he'd been paid off. "So very kind! Much as I would love to avail 
myself of your island hospitality, I have special needs that can best be served aboard my 
own vessel." 

"I'll just bet," I said. 

I had suddenly become ravenous, so Mimo nuked some tacos to take along, spreading 
them with the sweet pepper salsa he'd prepared for the postponed flapjaw feast. To wash 
them down, he brought up a pony keg of Yucateca Leon Negra from his cellar coldroom. 
Then all three of us piled into my friend's Range Rover and bumped and splashed along 
the half-flooded marl track to the primitive hopper pad a kilometer away. Mimo was the 
only island resident prosperous enough to own a private aircraft. The other two parked at 


the muddy field were beaters belonging to our local taxi outfit. 

We whisked upstairs to the peaceful ionosphere, high above the raging storm, where a 
voluptuous Moon of Manukura was shining amidst a rabble of multihued comets. 
Cybulka, overflowing the four-seat passenger compartment, polished off the lion's share 
of the food and beer and then promptly went to sleep, snoring like a phlegmy oboe. 

To ensure our privacy I asked Mimo to close the flight-deck door. Then I told him 
everything, beginning with Eve's call and ending with Jake Silver's timely pinch. The 
beer loosened my tongue and comforted my hurts. I also found it was cathartic as all git-
out to recount the events of my devastating day to a sympathetic friend who would never 
in a million years consider judging or second-guessing me. 

Mimo listened in silence, smoking one of his expensive contraband Cuban cigars and 
staring out the windshield of the aircraft. When I finally finished, he asked, "What do you 
intend to do now?" 

"Take Jake's prisoner to Rampart Central on Seriphos. They've got psychoprobe 
machines there that'll make him sing like a Mormon choir. Even if this Lee is only a 
third-string operative, he's bound to be a direct link to Gala. Whether his evidence alone 
will be sufficient to prove Rampart's case against the Concern is a tougher call. Probably 
not. I was trained as a lawyer myself, you know, and it usually takes a truly hu-mongous 
pile of shit to bury an elephant. Especially when it's fighting for its life to crawl out from 
under." 

"But if you had Oliver Schneider as well... ?" 

"Bingo," I affirmed succinctly. "We prove the whole megillah, civil and criminal 
cases. The very fact of the conspiracy to devalue Rampart, and the tort—the civil wrong 
committed by Gala against the Starcorp, entitling Rampart to killer damages that would 
effectively dismember Gala-pharma AC. Aside from that little matter, Ollie had to be 
involved in the murder of Yaoshuang Qiu, Rampart's former Chief Tech Officer. He 
could connect Gala to that. Ollie and his apparatchiks might even provide a direct link to 
Elgar/ McGrath, who supervised Gala's entire covert operation in the Spur, including the 
Haluk lab on Cravat." 

"Schneider and his men may all be dead. Silenced." 

"That would have been the safest course for Gala. But Matt knew Ollie well, and she 
told me that he was slick as snot on a doorknob. I can't believe a man like that wouldn't 
write himself an insurance policy when he agreed to be Alis-tair Drummond's main 
mole." 

"Schneider might certainly still be useful to Galapharma," Mimo conceded. "His 
intimate knowledge of Rampart security measures would be invaluable—up to a certain 
critical point in time." 

I smiled wolfishly. "Exactamente. And it would be the job of whoever nabbed him to 
explain that the critical point was rapidly approaching. And turn him! Even using the 
machines, you get superior poop from a cooperating witness." 

"That 'someone' capturing Schneider. . . will it be you?" 

"I'll have to disappear," I said, not acknowledging the question, to which I did not 
have an answer. "Maintain the fiction of my death. Leave K-L and do a damned good job 
of covering my tracks, or Gala will just send a better class of assassin." 

"There is that." He blew a smoke ring. 

I reclined the copilot seat, leaned back and closed my good eye to match the puffed-


up one hiding under the coldpack and bandanna. Hurting, used up, and bummed out 
didn't begin to describe the shape I was in. Down in Arizona, folks would describe me as 
feeling lower than a roadkill horntoad. 

"Christ, Mimo, I thought I was back on K-L to stay. I was out of Rampart! Resigned 
to letting it be gobbled by the monster. Now I'm right back in the middle of the corporate 
shit-storm. It's Eve's fault that Gala came after me again. It's your fault that I'll probably 
have to scope out Dagasatt." 

Mimo said nothing. He would never call me a cowardly coyote, God bless him. On 
the other hand... 

"You knew I'd kissed off Rampart," I grumbled, "but you still had to dangle that 
damned Ziggy in front of my nose rather than telling Matt or Karl Nazarian about him. A 
mean-spirited Anglo might suspect you of deliberately trying to reinvolve me in the 
Starcorp. You Mexicans have convoluted notions of family obligation and honor." 

"We do," he agreed. "Of friendship also." 

"Hah! Saving me from myself—is that it?" 

"Who could do a Dagasatt penetration better than you?" he asked gently, returning to 
dangerous ground. 

For a few minutes I sulked behind my shut eyelids. Then: "Nobody, probably. 
Certainly not a Rampart Security force." 

"Would you care to explain?" 

"An operation like that is against Commonwealth law, unless Rampart's Legal 
Department can furnish solid proof— not hokum and hearsay from a crook like Ziggy—
that the aliens are harboring a corporate criminal fugitive and refuse to surrender him. Of 
course, if such proof did exist, and if Rampart were simpleminded enough to make an 
official request through CHW channels to mount a Dagasatt search, Ollie'd be out of 
there faster than chain lightning with a link snapped. A deniable penetration is the only 
option. Bounty hunter stuff." 

"This would be legal?" 

"The statutes are vague enough to make such an operation feasible. If a Throwaway 
like me dragged Ollie in and sold his ass to Rampart, there'd be no danger at all of his 
deposition being thrown out on grounds of illegal apprehension." 

Mimo said, "So you do intend to lead a raid." 

"Everything depends on what we wring out of Citizen Lee. Maybe his evidence will 
be so sensational that we won't even need Schneider." 

"Then you'd be off the hook." Mimo's voice held the faintest tinge of reproach. 

"Except for having to go underground to prevent another attempt on my fast-
withering life." 

"Concerning that, there are matters that will have to be taken care of. The disposal of 
Kofi's body, and so on. How shall I proceed?" 

"Let me think." I hauled myself back upright and ruminated for a while. "You're 
going to need help. I think we can trust Sal Faustino, don't you? If any Gala covert op 
came sniffing around later and tried to put the squeeze on her, she'd turn him into sushi." 

"I agree that Sal is the perfect choice for an accomplice. And Oren Vinyard, if another 
person is needed." 

"How about this, then. You guys put the body into Black Coffee tonight. Sal uses her 
tugboat to tow Kofi's sub to the Blue Gut and scuttles it deep. Then she tows Pernio out 


and does the same thing. I hate like hell to lose the boat, but it's full of blood and other 
suspicious shit. You'll have to clean up inside my house and take care of the mess at 
Kofi's place." 

"The rain will help with that," he said. 

"Right. Tomorrow, when Kofi and I turn up missing, you inform the Eyebrow gang 
that Kofi told you he was going out in the storm last night to look for me. You argued 
with him but he insisted. Now we're both presumed lost. The grief-stricken gang has a 
nice wake for the pair of us. Jake Silver reports the double tragedy to the local media 
because I'm a VIP, albeit a tarnished one. A Manukura webstringer snatches up the story 
and passes it along to the cosmos at large. That'll cool Gala's jets and give me room to 
maneuver—whatever I decide to do." 

"Mmm. It could work." More smoke rings, concentric this time. 

I tipped a nod toward the closed passenger compartment door. "We'll have to make 
sure that Captain Cybulka doesn't blow my cover. Are you absolutely certain he'll keep 
his trap shut?" 

Mimo looked hurt. 

"Lo siento, don Guillermo," I apologized, "but if he blabs, I'm gutted." 

"He won't." 

My friend finished his cigar. I had a large cup of coffee to counteract the beer, visited 
the ship's bathroom, and considered the matter of Lee's interrogation on Seriphos. I'd 
have to supervise that myself, preferably with Karl Nazarian's assistance. If Lee's 
evidence proved to be as crucial as I hoped, we'd have to ship him off to Toronto by the 
speediest and most secure means possible. 

We were almost to the starport when Mimo broke into my thoughts. "Perhaps it's not 
my business to ask, Helly, and if I'm out of line I want you to tell me so. But if you did 
decide to penetrate Dagasatt, how might you go about it?" 

I told him and he burst out laughing. "I was about to suggest that very thing." 

"Wiseass beaner." 

"Have you had field experience in high-tech Insap penetrations?" 

"I led a few," I said cautiously. 

But that was a long time ago, and in the Orion Arm of the galaxy, far away. With my 
expensive legal education—and my goddamn famous name—I'd been a natural for ICS's 
career fast track. I made Divisional Chief Inspector by the time I turned twenty-eight, and 
had more important things to do besides chasing Y'tata gunrunners or busting cyberflea-
markets on Kallenyi worlds. There were even those in the Commerce Secretariat who had 
called me brilliant. 

They'd changed their tune fast enough when I was framed for malfeasance... 

"Who would accompany you to Dagasatt—assuming you went?" 

"Well, I really don't know jackshit about the Qastt," I admitted. "But Matt will 
probably be able to put me in touch with some experienced people who might like to earn 
a few mil pulling hazardous private duty." 

Mimo's dark eyes were glittering. I'd seen that glitter before. "Why don't you take a 
human contraband trader along with you—one who knows the Qastt customs and can 
provide a useful cover story for the operation? No, not Ziggy! I know another crook who 
has been to Dagasatt more than once, even though it was many years ago. One who is 
eminently trustworthy." 


I glared at the old man in horror. "No! Abso-fucking-lutely not!" 

"Nonsense," laughed the semiretired Smuggler King of the Perseus Spur. "I'd enjoy it. 
Things have been very dull since Cravat. Sal and Oren can take care of Kofi's body and 
all the rest of it. We can call them right now, on a contingency basis. Your options will 
remain open." 

"Got an answer for everything, haven't you, compadre!" 

"Not always. But often enough." He lit another cigar. 

We reached Manukura Starport a little after 0100 hours, and Mimo guided the hopper 
down through the heavy tropical rain. Our console ground display showed only a small 
number of starships docked at the tiny port. Most of them were cargo vessels. A single 
commercial carrier was parked at the passenger terminal, together with three private 
cruisers. One was Mimo's pride and joy, El Plomazo—"the bullet"—a nifty Y660 cutter. 
The second was an aging Iridion-16 that I presumed belonged to Ziggy. The radical 
conformation of the third was evident even on the small screen. Its transponder ID was 
BXX-0021, an experimental Bodascon designation. 

"Cielos!" murmured my friend. His eyes were sparkling again. "What a lovely ride 
our villain came in on! How I'd like to check her out." 

"Well, you could. That's aY700 prototype. I promised Jake I'd get Lee's ship off K-L, 
so how about swiping her for me? You shouldn't have any problem figuring out her 
goodies. Fly her to Seriphos and put down in the restricted area of Rampart Starbase." 

"I may not want to give her up!" 

"Actually, you may not have to ... if you're serious about wanting to go along on the 
Dagasatt raid." 

He hoisted one shaggy gray eyebrow. "You know I am." 

"Fly the Y700 to Seriphos by yourself while I schlep Lee there in your Plomazo. 
Assuming that I do decide to lead Operation Q, we'll use the Gala ship and you can pilot 
her. We'll need a blitz buggy in a job like that, especially for the getaway." 

If we got away. 

Mimo said, "Plomazo might also come in handy for your operation." 

"If you don't mind, I'd rather use her to carry Garth Wing Lee off to Toronto as fast as 
possible after we finish tossing his brain. Rampart hasn't got anything in the barn to touch 
Plomazo. She can get to Earth in ten days, and she's also more heavily armed than any of 
ExSec's cutters." 

He nodded. "I'm agreeable. You know, Helly, it would be a good idea to examine the 
contents of the Y700's computer before putting her in harm's way. It might hold 
interesting data about Lee's work in the Spur." 

"Good thinking. Contact Karl Nazarian when you arrive on Seriphos. He'll get 
someone to do a data dump and get started on the analysis. I'll tell him that you're 
coming." 

"Perhaps I should also have the prototype's identification modified. Just in case." 

"Yeah. Right." Why did I have the feeling that I stood on the rim of a slippery slope 
and any second I'd go over— taking my friend with me? "Assuming we do go to 
Dagasatt, and assuming we survive, the Y700 will be yours to keep—to make up for my 
losing Chispa at Helly's Comet. I'll fiddle the registration transfer somehow through 
Rampart, and Gala won't be in any position to squawk. Maybe you can call the new 
starship Chispa Dos." 


"Helly, Helly. I think you've lived with Throwaways and rascals too long." 

I laughed. "Found my natural moral milieu, that's all. We'll talk about this later, on 
Seriphos." 

The hopper touched down and I went into the passenger compartment to wake the 
Sleeping Beauty. 

"Rise and shine, Zig. We've arrived." 

"I had the most amazing dream," the fat man burbled as he pulled himself together. A 
robolimo was waiting to take us to the terminal. "I dreamt that Rampart Starcorp hired 
me as a marketing consultant to the Qastt. I went before their Great Congress and gave a 
magnificent presentation, with the result that a stupendous new era of trade opened 
between humanity and the nasty little Squeakers!" He simpered. "My stipend from 
Rampart was princely." 

"Dream on, sweet prince," I growled. We exited the star-ship and crossed the rain-
lashed apron, after which Ziggy departed rather sniffily to his own vessel and Mimo and I 
went into the terminal. 

A smartly uniformed young Public Safety officer approached and inquired, "Is one of 
you Chief Inspector Helmut Icicle, Rampart ExSec?" 

Mimo smothered what might have been a cough. Damn Jake and his sense of humor. 

"That's me." The hood of my old yellow slicker was up to obfuscate my identity and 
hide the wraparound bandanna. I was still wearing the sweatsuit and the sneakers without 
laces. 

The cop gave me a dubious look. If he was expecting credentials and a snappy salute, 
he was doomed to disappointment. After a beat he said, "Superintendent Silver is waiting. 
Follow me." He spun on the heel of his boot and marched off with us trailing behind. 

At this hour, the terminal was tenanted only by service personnel and sparse numbers 
of travelers. We took an elevator into the bowels of the building and eventually arrived at 
the security offices. Jake, dressed in rumpled civvies, was asleep in a chair in the 
anteroom. He awoke the instant we walked in. 

"It's about time you got here," he snarled. Climbing to his feet, he yawned 
prodigiously and rubbed goop from his pouchy eyes. "What happened to you, Helly? You 
look like a fugitive from a back-alley production of Pirates ofPenzance" 

I pushed back my slicker's hood and removed the kerchief and the coldpacks. The eye 
was feeling much better. I could even see out of it again, a little. The back of my head 
still hurt. "Might have known you'd make fun of a man's disabilities. Actually, I ran into 
several doors." 

Jake gave a disbelieving grunt and turned to Mimo. "And how are you, Captain 
Bermudez? Giving the Chief Inspector a little assistance tonight?" 

"I'm always willing to help a friend, Superintendent." 

"And you've got some beauts. Is that freakazoid pusher pal of yours out of here?" 

Mimo nodded. "Ziggy indicated that he would be leaving immediately." 

"He better be. Even on a world like K-L we have minimal standards." 

Jake reminds me of an English mastiff, a breed favored by my former wife, Joanna. 
Not in appearance, because mastiffs are trim-looking dogs and Jake is slightly potbellied 
and sartorially challenged, but in his watchful, melancholy air of having seen it all—and 
God help you if you try to perpetrate any of it again in his territory. 

I told him, "Thanks for the bust. I'll take the subject in charge and Mimo will remove 


his vessel." 

Silver said to the waiting officer, "Nikitenko, please escort Captain Bermudez, here, 
to starship BXX-0021 at the general astro gate. Expedite his departure." 

"Sir, under the circumstances, that will require authorization—" 

"Get it," Jake said. He turned to me. "This way." 

We tramped hither and yon through deserted corridors until we came to a door with a 
simple sign: DETENTION. Outside of it was a rider-type antigrav baggage transport 
holding a coffin-sized container. 

"What's this?" I asked. 

"A coffin, dummy. Did you think you were going to push a shackled, unconscious 
Galapharma spook through the terminal in an invalid chair? I told you we were going to 
draw a veil over this arrest. The officers involved think Lee is a well-connected Rampart 
exec wanted for nameless database perversions. We Kedgeree Kops are discreetly giving 
him the boot back into Starcorp jurisdiction." 

He swiped a card through the detention room lock slot and the door opened. We went 
inside, where there were two small cells fronted by force-fields. Chained hand and foot to 
a bunk in one of them was a handsome Oriental male wearing a designer business suit 
and impressive jewelery. He was out cold. I stood staring at him for a few moments. It 
was still hard to believe he'd been netted so easily. 

"Lee might be a real prize, Jake. If his probe comes up aces at Rampart Central, it 
could help save the Starcorp's bacon." 

"I thought you didn't care." 

I sighed. "Sometimes I do, sometimes I don't. It's a puzzlement." 

"It's your damn daddy's fault," snorted Jake Silver, "and I really hate Freudian shit 
like that." 

"You're nuts, Super." 

"And you're a poor putz in search of a father figure. Thank God you latched onto 
Bermudez instead of me. Come on, help me carry the prisoner." He shut off the confining 
field and we went into the cell. Jake readjusted the restraints. 

"Did you sweep Lee for suicide devices?" I asked. I wasn't about to touch the 
psychoanalytical wisecrack. 

"Don't be silly. You can do a full body scan in your corporate torture chamber on 
Seriphos. The magnum stun-dart he took during the scuffle is good for about three more 
hours. All the same, I'd keep his cuffs on." 

We lugged the body out into the corridor and boxed it. Jake had thoughtfully bored 
holes in the plastic casket's sides. When the lid was closed and fastened, he climbed into 
the antigrav cart's driver seat. It was only large enough for one. 

My face fell. "You mean I have to walk? I'm not a well man." 

"So ride on the coffin, cowboy." 

I mounted with creaky caution, feeling like the actor Slim Pickens in the last scene of 
the classic film, Dr. Strangelove. In due time we reached Plomazo's berth and stowed the 
cargo. The Y700 had already taken off and it would certainly reach Vetivarum 
Conurbation on Seriphos long ahead of me. Mimo's personal starship cruised at a zippy 
enough sixty ross, which would get me and my prisoner there in about two and a half 
hours. 

At the last, I explained to Jake how I'd be playing dead, and what his role in the 


upcoming media farce was to be. He began bitching before I'd even finished. 

"You get somebody else to play straight man in your scam! I have no intention—" 

"It's a small thing, Jake. You won't be compromised in any way by issuing a simple 
announcement of my apparent death, and Kofi's. You can qualify the news release any 
way you like to cover your ass. You 'received a report.' It's hearsay." 

"Well..." 

We were standing on the open tarmac, getting wet. I switched to wheedle mode. 
"Earlier, we spoke of Christmas—I mean, Hanukkah! Would you consider leaving K-L 
and taking a highly remunerative executive security position in the corporate sector? 
Provided that the sector doesn't go belly-up that is." 

His lip curled in a wry smile. "If we're talking pie in the sky, I'd rather rejoin CCID 
back in Toronto. My wife misses the grandchildren and I wouldn't mind seeing snow 
again before I die." 

"Ah." 

"But you don't have that kind of clout, Hell-Butt." 

"I'll give it my very best shot, Jake." 

He made a raspberryish sound that mingled cynical disbelief and tired resignation. 
"Just get out of Dodge and make damn sure none of your Rampart tsuris comes down on 
me or my little planet." 

Superintendent Jacob Silver turned and squelched off into the rain. I climbed into 
Plomazo and called the tower for a tow to the launch pad. 

 

 

Chapter 5 

 

Light snow was sifting down when I landed at Rampart Star-base on Seriphos. During 
the few days I'd been gone, winter had arrived on the planet. The huge port facility had 
most of its docking accommodations tucked away underground, but I made special 
arrangements so my prisoner and I could bypass the terminal. 

A gobot truck towed the starship into one of the elevator sheds, out of the weather. 
Instead of programming a descent to the service area, I waited. After a few minutes a 
hopper-craft bearing the Rampart crenellated-wall logo came gliding across the field, 
meter-high. It wafted into the shed along with a swirling cloud of snowflakes and settled. 
A stocky figure dressed in winter gear climbed out and waved. Karl Nazarian had come 
to meet me as I had requested. 

Karl was one of the charter Rampart Small Stakeholders, a contemporary of Simon, 
Ethan, and Dirk Vanderpost. Sometime during his long life he'd had a course of 
rejuvenation, but his face still looked like a topo map of the Caucasian mountains divided 
by an aggressive buzzard-beak nose. He had founded the Starcorp's security force and 
headed it for over thirty years, prior to the regime of Oliver Schneider. Until he joined my 
infamous Department of Stupid Projects, Karl had pottered his twilight days away 
working on Rampart's archives. When I told him I was quitting, he had threatened to go 
back to Earth and retire to a lakeside cottage in Armenia. I wondered if Simon had 
persuaded him to change his mind. 

I gathered my stuff, such as it was, donned a nifty Burberry jacket of Mimo's with a 
scannerproof visor hood that I found in the flight-deck locker, and came down the cargo 


ramp with my boxed and still-snoozing prisoner trundling behind on a tote. 

En route from K-L, I'd warned Karl via SS com that Mimo was coming in with a 
stolen starship that would require immediate cosmetic detailing and a counterfeit 
registration. I also told him that I was supposed to be dead, had a Gala-pharma covert 
operative in custody, and urgently needed help in a top-secret psychoprobe gig. My 
former colleague had reacted to this news with his usual equanimity, reining in his 
curiosity until he could question me in person. 

Karl shook my hand after I buttoned up Plomazo and sent her downstairs to a berth. 
"Welcome back, Helly! I rather thought we hadn't seen the last of you." 

"I'm not rethinking my resignation, if that's what you mean. And I was a little 
surprised to find you still holding down the fort at Special Projects when I called. I 
thought you were going to disband the outfit for me." 

"The letter of intent is in my computer, but—" 

"Send it. Dated three days ago. I mean it. I have a job for you and a few other 
adventurous SP souls that'll require your instant severance. You'll be going to Earth, 
driving the speedboat I just rode in on. Pardon the cliche, but Rampart's life could depend 
on it." 

"What about your life?" 

"Karl, I told you I'm a dead man. For the time being, anyhow." 

"Is your resurrection contingent on what we can squeeze out of the person inside that 
box?" 

"Maybe. It might depend even more on you and your crew hauling the person safely 
to Toronto when we finish pumping him. Did Mimo come in okay?" 

"Over half an hour ago. The new ship is docked in the restricted area, under guard, 
being refueled and modified according to his instructions. Lotte Dietrich is helping with 
the computer data-dump. How about if I take her along to analyze it en route to Earth?" 

"Good idea." She was Special Projects' best encrypt breaker, one of the faithful little 
band that I'd left in the lurch when I skipped out. "Let's take our friend here to the Library 
and get started on the quiz session." 

When Simon had dragooned me into being VP Special Projects, in essence forming 
an independent internal investigation force that reported only to him, I'd set up a secret 
command center in the subbasement of the Vetivarum Public Database. Presided over by 
Karl, our tiny gang of counterespionage agents and cybermavens had been completely 
divorced from Rampart Central and what was then the undesirable scrutiny of Vice 
President Schneider and his suspect Department of Confidential Services—which 
included both the External and Internal Security divisions. We called our lair the Library. 
For reasons of my own, I wanted to question Lee there, rather than at the now sanitized 
InSec facility inside Central. 

But Karl's black eyes did a shifty little dance and he raised one shoulder in apology. 
"Um. There's been a slight change of plan. It just wasn't practical to move the heavy-duty 
psycho-probe equipment across town from InSec on such short notice. And you know the 
Library isn't really set up to handle high-risk prisoners, either. We'll do the work at 
Central." 

"But I told you—" 

"Don't worry. Matt Gregoire will stay out of the way to spare your wounded male 
ego." 


"That's not it at all," I mumbled. 

"The hell it isn't." 

"Dammit, Karl! I'm not trying to avoid Matt. There's still a remote chance that 
Rampart Central might harbor a Gala-pharma spy. It's vital that news of this prisoner's 
capture and interrogation doesn't leak out. And the same goes for my still being alive." 

"Don't worry. I've got everything arranged." My hood was still pushed back, and he 
seemed to become aware of my battered face for the first time. "You know, you really 
look terrible." 

"Damn right I do, and I'm sick of hearing about it. Among other things, I'm cruising 
on two hours' sleep, and I can't hit the sack until you and I finish grilling this Galapharma 
turkey." "Do you want to tell me what's been going down?" "I'll fill you in during the 
flight into town. Help me load the prisoner and let's get going." 

The city of Vetivarum, home to almost all of the half-million human inhabitants of 
Seriphos, is sited on a picturesque bay at the edge of the planet's rugged north polar 
continent. In summer, the climate is pleasantly temperate and the days are long and 
sunny. In winter, storms sweep down from the interior icefields and produce weather 
conditions similar to those of terrestrial Greenland. As the days shorten and become 
frigid, the Zmundigaim Insaps of Seriphos, whose culture is somewhere in transition 
between paleolithic and technogalactic, abandon their primitive camps in the geo-thermal 
mountain valleys where they earn a living gathering rozkoz spores and migrate to coastal 
villages. There, in huts loaded to the rafters with modern Earthling comforts, they 
basically party all winter long. 

Human Rampart employees and the service personnel who cater to them, trapped in 
the work ethic, just hunker down and endure until spring. My former colleagues had told 
me that most folks didn't mind the dark Seraphian winter. Those who did took their 
holiday breaks then, fleeing to planets with milder climes. Such as Kedge-Lockaby. 

Flying above the sprawling conurbation, where dusk was already coming on at 1500 
hours and powerful streetlamps shone fuzzily in the snowfall, I silently wished I were 
back on good old K-L myself. Or just about anywhere else except the headquarters of my 
family's endangered Starcorp. 

The ziggurat bulk of Rampart Central, three hundred stories high, glowed against the 
darkening sky like some monstrous wedding cake spotlit beneath a scintillating canopy of 
sparks. It was the only structure in Vetivarum with a protective force-field umbrella, a 
white truncated pyramid ornamented with blue and gold, which proclaimed its 
domination of the planet and every person living on it. 

 

We touched down on the landing pad atop the building and were met by Matt 
Gregoire and three armed paramedics. She didn't say anything to me, but of course I was 
incognito by then, behind my mirrored face-shield. Garth Wing Lee was immediately 
transported to the interrogation chamber of the Internal Security Division, where a doctor 
waited to revive him and prep him for the procedure. Matt took Karl and me to a small 
observation booth above the chamber. 

I doffed my disguise. "Thanks for helping us, Matt." 

"I haven't yet assigned anyone to record your prisoner's deposition," she said briskly. 
There was no smile, not even a greeting for me. "Will Karl be handling that?" 

"I need his assistance with the questioning. If you would, I'd like to ask you to 


supervise the recording and witness it officially. It's best if as few persons as possible are 
involved at this point." 

"Very well. I presume that you do know how to operate the psychoprobe equipment." 

Interrogation wasn't my specialty when I was with ICS, but I'd learned the basics, just 
like all the other agents. I kept my expression neutral when I replied. "I can handle it. 
You may recall that I also had personal experience being hooked up to the machines on 
Cravat." 

"Yes." She looked away. 

And when I regained consciousness in an underground cell, pain-racked and weeping 
from shame, my head was lying in Mart's lap.. . 

Karl asked me, "Didn't they ream you when you were accused back on Earth?" 

"As a noncorporate defendant I had the option of not submitting. So I didn't. 
Psychoprobing can sometimes do permanent brain damage, and my lawyers didn't want 
me to risk it. They thought they could prove my innocence by conventional means, since 
the trumped-up evidence against me was so circumstantial. They were wrong." 

A voice came through the annunciator. "The prisoner is ready, Vice President 
Gregoire." The physician and her aides looked up at us. 

"Thank you, Dr. Krasny," Matt said. "He'll require intensive resuscitation later, since 
he's being transported offworld. We'll call you when we need you." 

The medics filed out. 

Matt turned to Karl and me. "Do what you have to do." 

One of the first things Lee confessed was that he had been fitted with two ingenious 
microminiature destructive devices, in addition to a conventional suicide implant. Matt, 
Karl, and I hastily took cover while the unflappable Dr. Krasny returned, wearing bomb-
disposal gear, and removed the lethal trinkets from Lee's body cavities through neat 
keyhole incisions under local anaesthetic. 

When the prisoner was no longer in a position to kill us or himself, Karl and I 
questioned him for nearly five hours. Rampart's legal justification under CHW law for 
taking a de-positio sub duritia was thin but valid: that Lee had conspired to murder a high 
Rampart official—to wit, me—since my resignation had not yet been completely 
processed and finalized at the time of Kofi's attack. 

Theoretically, the high-intensity psychoprobe procedure is capable of emptying the 
entire memory bank of a subject; practically, results are limited not only by time 
considerations but also by the amount of neuron destruction the inquisitors are prepared 
to inflict upon the inquisitee as they obtain the deposition under duress. 

Lee was by no means scrubbed clean, wrung out, and hung up to dry at the end of the 
session, since I wanted to keep him in reasonably good shape for further questioning on 
Earth; but we had gleaned a fair amount of raw data from him. 

Garth Wing Lee—his real name, to our surprise—was a high-ranking agent of 
Galapharma AC, having the innocuous title Deputy Chief of Client Services. His 
immediate superior was Tyler Baldwin, Gala's top spook. He was originally based at 
Concern headquarters in Glasgow but had been working in the Perseus Spur for two 
years. Regrettably, he had not been a close associate of the late Elgar/McGrath. 

Lee did not know the precise whereabouts of Oliver Schneider, who was apparently 
the responsibility of an another Gala operative named Erik Skogstad; but he did confirm 
that Schneider and his men were alive and working for Galapharma somewhere in the 


Perseus Spur. 

The most important information that we obtained from the prisoner involved his 
formal assignment—to spy on the Haluk while overtly expediting the aliens' illegal 
purchases from Galapharma, Bodascon, Sheltok, Homerun, and Car-nelian Concerns. Lee 
thus was a material witness to, and a participant in, a grand conspiracy by the five 
Concerns to violate CHW Statute 50, which prohibited trade of certain high-technology 
equipment and disclosure of certain scientific procedures to nontreaty alien races. Going 
by the letter of the law, it was treason. 

This chunk of evidence comprised what is known in the intelligence trade as platinum 
poop, or a Gotcha. Small wonder our prisoner had been a veritable walking booby trap. 

An emergency order from Baldwin had sent Lee hightailing it from the Haluk planet 
Artiuk, the aliens' principal Spur colony and a center of Galapharma huggermuggery, to 
procure my homicide on K-L. Lee was not privy to the motivation behind the order. I 
asked him why in God's name Baldwin had sent a hypersensitive operative such as 
himself to waste Little Old Me—and why he hadn't chosen to stick around long enough 
to ensure that the job was done properly. 

Lee had been told by his superior that my immediate death was deemed "crucial." No 
other explanation was given. Erik Skogstad, an experienced assassin who might more 
logically have been sent on the assignment, had been unavailable, so Lee was pushed into 
the breach. He had delegated the job to Kofi because he himself was "a specialist in 
xenorelations, not wet affairs." His overhasty departure from K-L was occasioned by a 
nasty flap back on Artiuk involving some drunken Carnelian robotics engineers, a much-
prized xeno domestic animal, and an enraged Haluk bureaucrat. Soothing the latter was 
judged to require Lee's personal intervention. 

Interesting as it was, this portion of the confession was worth diddly squat relative to 
Rampart's case against Galapharma. Since I was now well and truly disenfranchised, 
neither Gala nor its agents could be convicted of instigating my botched murder. Under 
Commonwealth law, Throwaways might be slaughtered with impunity—although the 
deed was mercifully rare in civilized venues—provided that their deaths did not inflict a 
"consequential" civil wrong upon any citizen or corporate entity, or result in a public 
nuisance. 

When the questioning was finally over, I had come to an unhappy conclusion. Garth 
Wing Lee was a vitally important material witness for the Commonwealth. All by 
himself, he would provide sufficient evidence to bring in an indictment against five 
Concerns for illegal alien trading and possibly for treason. Unfortunately, he wasn't worth 
chickenshit in Rampart's life-or-death battle against the Galapharma takeover. 

To win that one, we still needed Oliver Schneider. 

Dr. Krasny and her paramedics returned to take Lee to a secure recovery facility, 
while Karl went off to supervise the disbanding of Special Projects as an arm of Rampart 
Star-corp in the Perseus Spur. Most of our hastily recruited SP agents would be returning 
to private life; but Karl had invited three peculiarly talented individuals to accompany 
him to Toronto on Plomazo: the computer analyst Lotte Dietrich, a cunning old InSec 
operative named Cassius Potter, and Hector Motlaletsie, a retired Fleet Security spook. 
Some stealthy business needed doing back on Earth, and Karl and his associates were the 
only ones I could trust to handle it. 

When I rejoined Matt Gregoire in the observation booth, she gave me a plastic case. 


"Here are two data-dime copies of Lee's deposition, witnessed by me and encrypted 
to Phase XII as you requested. The computer is swept clean. Is there anything else you 
need from us?" 

I did my best to match her detached professional demeanor— a tough job when 
you're suffering from terminal fatigue, semistarvation, and a lively collection of physical 
miseries and emotional collywobbles. "Keep one of these dimes in a safe place. Give it to 
Eve or Simon if you get word that the bad guys have stopped my clock. Karl will take the 
other copy to Earth." 

She seemed unperturbed at the renewed prospect of my demise. "Is that all?" 

"I'd like the use of a private-channel subspace com. I'll have to tell my sister Eve 
about the results of this interrogation. After that, I need to eat and sleep. I could use your 
help recruiting seven or eight volunteers for a highly unorthodox and very dangerous 
operation of mine. My old Special Projects gang didn't have quite the right people." 

She frowned. "What kind of operation?" 

I put my finger to my lips. "Can't tell you." 

"How long will the operation last?" 

"Maybe a week, if all goes well. If it doesn't—" I shrugged. "The mission will be 
Rampart-deniable. The participants will earn four million each, with double indemnity in 
case of death." 

"Good grief! Who's paying for this?" 

"Simon. He doesn't know it yet, but he will after I've talked to Eve." 

"I see," she said doubtfully. "What type of personnel do you require?" 

"I need one pilot with combat experience and seven others with special weapons and 
assault training. Familiarity with the Qastt race would be a plus. The people can't have 
any connection to Rampart. Former Zone Patrol agents would be ideal." 

"I might be able to round up a short list of possibles. When would this operation 
begin?" 

"As soon as I can get my broken ass in gear. No later than noon tomorrow." 

"Then you aren't going back to Earth with Karl and the prisoner?" 

"No. I'm needed elsewhere." 

She finally smiled. "Poor Helly. And you thought you were home free when you 
resigned from Rampart! Are you sure you can't tell me what this is all about?" 

"I'm a free agent embarking on an unsanctioned and very illegal mission with a 
handful of low-life henchpersons. First I'm going to Nogawa-Krupp. You'll be asked 
shortly to authorize the release of certain notorious prisoners being held there. A 
mysterious benefactor is about to bail them out of the hoosegow." 

She stared at me, mystified. A wild surmise began to dawn. "Those Qastt pirates? 
Don't tell me that—" 

"Stop right there! Don't even think it." 

She gave an exasperated sigh. "Oh, Helly." 

"Oh, Matt," I replied sadly. 

She is my age, thirty-six, although she looks ten years younger. Her hair and eyes are 
very dark and her skin is the color of cinnamon. She had been Chief of Fleet Security at 
the time of Eve's disappearance and had directed the early, fruitless search for my sister. 
An impulse that was at least partially hormonal had inspired me to ask Matt to join the 
team of Baker Street Irregulars that had engineered Eve's rescue. Post-Cravat, while I 


concentrated mostly on the Ollie hunt, Matt took over Schneider's job and cleaned out the 
moles and incompetents in Rampart Security like an avenging angel. 

Matt Gregoire had been my professional colleague, my companion in peril, and my 
lover. The day I quit, I asked her to come away with me and share my carefree life in the 
islands. She had turned me down without an explanation. 

"I have a secure SS unit in my inner office," she said, "in a cabinet on the right-hand 
wall. I'll tell my secretary to expect you." 

I nodded meekly. "Since I'm officially dead, I'll have to hide behind a scannerproof 
visor. Will this badge Karl gave me serve as a laissez-passer for a masked weirdo?" 

"No one on this floor will stop you. There's a sofa bed and facilities in my office's 
little back room if you'd like to stay there. It's totally secure. You can order whatever kind 
of food you like through the servitron and then get some rest. If you like, I'll come and 
wake you at"—she consulted her wrist unit—"say, oh-six-hundred hours. I'll bring you 
the list of eligible candidates for your team of commandos." 

"Pick eight of the best. I trust your judgment. Send them to Mimo for kitting out and 
briefing. He's aboard the stolen Bo-dascon Y700 prototype that snuck into Starbase for a 
clandestine refit." 

"So Mimo's going on this mysterious mission with you." 

"He invited himself. You know how he is." 

"Yes. And I know how you are, too." 

As she turned to leave the observation booth, I said, "One last thing, Matt." 

"What is it?" 

"I don't want to find your name on the volunteer list. This isn't the kind of mission a 
Rampart executive can participate in. And I won't have you quitting your new position to 
qualify." 

She smiled, once again distancing herself from me behind a facade of remote 
professionalism. "No danger of that happening, Helly. The circumstances are entirely 
different now, aren't they?" 

Before I could reply, she was out the door and gone. 

I skulked down the corridors of the 220th floor of Rampart Central, ignored by 
uniformed InSec agents and civilian personnel alike, and finally came to an impressive 
executive suite with a silver plaque that said, 

 

MATILDE GREGOIRE—VICE-PRESIDENT FOR CONFIDENTIAL SERVICES. 

 

The flunkies in the outer office didn't even look up from their computers as I slipped 
in. Mart's secretary, Boris Brago-nier, glanced at me incuriously and silently pointed to a 
familiar door, which stood ajar. I went inside, engaged the manual lock, and stripped off 
the overly warm hooded jacket. 

The room was large, with a window overlooking a panorama of snow-dimmed city 
lights. Mart's crowded desk held an antique green-shaded reading lamp, a brass cup full 
of computer stylomikes, pens and Hi-Liters, a data-reader, three e-notebooks, an 
overflowing tray of papers, a magslate entitled DEPARTMENTAL BUDGET---THIRD 
QUARTER, and a slender ceramic vase with a small spray of brown-and-gold hothouse 
orchids. The framed holo of Matt and me standing arm in arm on the aft flat of my 
submarine was gone. 


I got something to eat on a tray, then pulled the private sub-space communication unit 
down into position and flopped into a swivel chair in front of the screen. During the 
twenty-five minutes it took to establish the encrypted subspace link to Earth without 
benefit of corporate priority, I gobbled a rare sirloin steak, six baby red potatoes, and a 
side of steamed broccoli in Dijon mustard sauce. I washed the food down with a tall glass 
of Rainier ale and then began to nod off. The sight of Eve's face abruptly appearing on 
the com monitor shocked me back to alertness. 

"Good God, Asa," my older sister said peevishly. Didn't you check the Zebra Clock? 
It's the middle of the night in Arizona." 

"It's evening here at Rampart Central. Wintertime, too." 

She did a double take. "What are you doing on Seriphos?" 

"Poking into Rampart business again. Can't you tell by looking at me?" 

Her eyes widened in dismay. Their irises were still human— green with amber rings 
around the pupil, like my own. Unlike mine, her "whites" were a vivid, alien azure as a 
result of the partial genen procedure she had undergone. "What happened?" 

"I'm stabbed, fish-bit, punched to a pulp, and mad as a peeled rattlesnake. But I've got 
good news all the same. We caught us a Galapharma agent, Evie." 

All sisterly concern vanished and she snapped, "Tell me!" 

Once again I recapitulated the events of the long day, adding the results of Garth 
Wing Lee's interrogation. From time to time Eve broke in with questions to clarify my 
slightly muddled narrative. 

When I ran out of steam, she said, "This is fantastic! But.. . you do realize that we'll 
have to keep this man on ice, rather than turn him over to CCID immediately when he 
arrives on Earth." 

"I've thought about that—" 

She swept on urgently, telling me what I already knew. "Lee is a stellar witness for 
Xenoaffairs, implicating the five Concerns in crimes against the Commonwealth. But his 
evidence doesn't bolster Rampart's case against Galapharma the way Oliver Schneider's 
would. From what you've told me, it seems plain that Lee operated in an entirely different 
province." 

"Evie, we can't just sit on this deposition. It's too important. Rampart might even lay 
itself open to an obstruction of justice charge—" 

"And what do you think will happen when Alistair Drum-mond discovers that 
Galapharma is about to be indicted for a Statute 50 violation, based on evidence that 
Rampart submitted? He will find out, you know." 

I just shook my head. 

Eve's voice fell to a harsh whisper. "Asa, he might try to have Pop killed, or Mom. 
Thinking either death could force an immediate merger. Pop has willed his majority stake 
in the Starcorp to Dan, Beth, and me in equal portions. I'm certain Dan and Beth would 
cave in if Pop was gone. Mom's entire stake will be inherited by her Reversionist Party 
charities. They'd approve the merger because of the financial incentive. Once Rampart is 
swallowed by Gala, Drummond will find a way to suppress or impeach Lee's deposition. 
He'll certainly destroy the other evidence we have." 

"I don't see how he'd be able to quash this confession," I said stubbornly. "Not with 
Mart's certification and Karl as interrogator of record." 

"Drummond might think he could. The man's not sane, Asa." 


Neither was he a certifiable nutcase. Megalomaniacs like Alistair Drummond have 
become emperors and fuhrers, served by underlings who never questioned their most 
irrational orders. Eve was probably right about the potential dangers, but I felt we had to 
accept the risk. 

"I'm not going to stand by and let another cover-up happen, Eve! You can't hide this 
evidence the way you've hidden your demiclone condition. We have an obligation to 
humanity—" 

She pressed ahead with relentless logic. "Suppose that we blow the whistle. 
Drummond commands his minions to do their worst. One or more members of the Frost 
family die. Rampart is absorbed by Galapharma. All of the other circumstantial evidence 
we have pointing to a Haluk threat is suppressed, but Gala and its cohorts are indicted for 
illegal trading as a result of Lee's deposition. I don't think a treason charge would stick. 
What happens next? Your average Commonwealth bureaucrat sitting on the judicial 
panel might look at the Haluk trade conspiracy and see only an insignificant technical 
violation of Statute 50. A Mickey Mouse rap! Galapharma and the other four Concerns 
might very well be able to beat it or escape with a wrist-slap by using that legal principle 
Carnelian cited when it conspired to peddle robotics to the Joru twenty years ago." 

I groaned. "Non detrimentum—no harm done. It could happen." 

"Of course it could. Because thus far, trading human high technology to the Haluk 
hasn't hurt anyone. Garth Wing Lee can't help us prove that the aliens have a secret 
agenda hostile to humanity. Not even my mutation proves that conclusively. Our other 
evidence is even less persuasive. Secondhand statements by Emily Konigsberg—a dead 
woman! Our personal observations of a suspicious Haluk genen facility, now 
inconveniently demolished. A Haluk body that's been genetically engineered with human 
DNA. What do they really prove? Nothing! I say that we should keep Lee under wraps at 
least until—until you go to—" She fell silent. 

"Until I go to Dagasatt," I finished. "And find Ollie. And save Rampart from 
Galapharma. That's a lot of eggs you're putting in one ratty old basket, sis." 

"Are you going to the Qastt planet, Asa?" 

"Yes." 

"Then you know I'm right! So we hold back Lee's deposition." 

"Evie, the mission to Dagasatt could fail. It's possible we'll never get any solid proof 
of malicious intent by the Haluk. Not until the xenos decide to put their secret game plan 
into operation. Then Drummond and his shortsighted greedy buddies will be shocked by 
the wicked underhandedness of their clients. And the Commonwealth could find itself 
fighting a war." 

"Asa—" 

"You and I have to make certain that what we believe to be true about a possible 
Haluk threat becomes known to the Commonwealth. Even if Rampart goes down the 
drain. Even if Alistair Drummond destroys our whole family. We've got to tell someone 
in the government about this right now. No more goddamn waffling and agonizing and—
" 

The anxiety drained out of her face and relief bloomed as suddenly as springtime 
flowers in rainwatered desert. "Sontag!" she said. 

"What?" My head seemed stuffed with cotton wool. I had no idea what she meant. 

"We'll tell your friend, Efrem Sontag. The man you wanted me to show myself to . .. 


earlier." 

Yes. Before Simon had convinced her to remain in seclusion. Before I'd abandoned 
Rampart in disgust. 

Efrem Sontag, Commonwealth Assembly Delegate, Chairman of the Xenoaffairs 
Oversight Committee, was more than an old friend from my law school days. He was 
also a powerful legislator and one of the few people who hadn't believed in my frame-up. 
He'd keep the Lee evidence confidential for a few weeks while I tried to nail Schneider, 
but he'd have no compunction about blowing the lid off if worst came to worst. 

"It'll work," I told Eve. 

She was radiant now, full of renewed confidence. "Tell me what I should do." 

"I'm sending Karl Nazarian to Earth with Lee in custody. He and his people should 
get to Toronto in about ten days, flying Mimo Bermudez's Y660 smuggler's pride. Ask 
Sontag to meet them in Rampart Tower, under conditions of strictest secrecy. Karl will 
have a data-dime with the original deposition we took on Seriphos. I'd prefer that we 
didn't show that one to Ef because I'm one of the interrogators. A Throwaway could taint 
the evidence—and besides, I need to stay dead, even to Ef. So we'll have Karl repeat the 
most critical phases of Lee's psychoprobe interrogation. Ef can witness it personally. Karl 
will make three certified holovid copies—one for Ef, one for Rampart, and one other 
that's to be kept sealed unless some 'accident' befalls Sontag himself." 

"Who gets the third copy?" 

"A former colleague of mine, Chief Inspector Beatrice Mangan of the ICS Forensic 
Division." 

"The one who helped you finger Bronson Elgar as a Gala mole?" 

"Right. Now listen! The news of my alleged accidental death on Kedge-Lockaby will 
be webcast within a few hours. Use that as an excuse to call Sontag in Toronto—on a 
phone without video, of course. Tell him Galapharma ordered my death as part of the 
overall Haluk conspiracy. It's the truth, and Karl will see that Lee's new deposition 
corroborates it. I want you to also tell Ef why Gala feels it has to grab Rampart, no matter 
what: in order to hand over those fifteen hundred Spur planets that Drummond promised 
to the Haluk. Strictly speaking, that's not illegal. But it's imprudent as all hell and tends to 
bolster our contention that xeno hordes covet T-class worlds in the Milky Way." 

"Can we be sure Sontag won't feel obligated to go public with this information at 
once?" 

"I'm certain he'll be willing to wait, if there's a chance we can come up with 
additional substantiating evidence within a reasonable period of time. Convince him! Tell 
him a team of freelance agents has gone to a certain Spur planet to try to get the vital 
skinny. Just don't say that one of the agents is me. Rampart must officially deny invading 
Dagasatt." 

"Asa .. ." Eve paused. Her petite alien form on the communicator screen, 
incongruously garbed in a thin nightgown and negligee suited to the high desert summer 
night, leaned closer. She was smiling, and for an eerie moment I seemed to see her as she 
had been before the mutation. "In view of all this, I'm going to ask Simon to call an 
extraordinary meeting of the Rampart board immediately. I'll have him renominate me to 
the CEO position. I'm going to accept this time, without condition, and the board is going 
to vote me in. By acclamation." 

"Christ! Do you think you can you pull it off?" "I don't see why not. The Gang of 


Three and Aunt Emma will see it as a last futile gesture of defiance before the 
inevitable." She gave an ironic chuckle. "Besides—what can I possibly accomplish in six 
weeks, hiding out at the Sky Ranch?" "You tell me." 

"Well, for starters, I'll ask Gunter Eckert and Dan to come to Arizona and help me 
work out details of my new financing strategy." 

"You've got a strategy already! Fast work, Madame CEO." "I haven't just been 
brooding among the cacti for the last half year, you know," she remarked tartly. "I've 
considered a number of sneaky ways to get hold of the venture credit Rampart will need 
for major expansion." 

"Does a rank outsider get to hear how you intend to pull off the miracle?" 

"Not until I've firmed my ideas with Gunter." He was Rampart's Chief Financial 
Officer and another charter stakeholder, a board member whose progressive ideas had too 
often run afoul of Simon's conservatism, Zed's lack of vision, and my older brother Dan's 
penchant for micro-management. Dan, Chief Legal Officer of the Starcorp, would have to 
approve any plan of Eve's before Gunter attempted to implement it; but I had confidence 
in my sister's ability to twist his arm. She'd been doing it since we were kids. 

"By the time I get the financial business squared away," she went on, "Karl should be 
in Toronto with Garth Wing Lee. And do you know what, Asa? I intend to be there for 
the meeting with Assembly Delegate Efrem Sontag. In person." I gaped at her like a 
dumb damn flapjaw demon. "My God." "Why not? As long as we're sharing secrets, I'd 
like to let Sontag see for himself what the Haluk did to me on Cravat. Karl Nazarian can 
hook me to the psychoprobe machines to prove the truth of what I say about my 
condition. Hey! Don't you think it would be a hell of an attention-getter if I gave my 
deposition first? The reinterrogation of Lee can be Act Two ... and a bit of an anticlimax, 
if I do say so myself." 

"You know, Evie, that's rather brilliant." 

Her expression was almost smug. "Of course it is. And as the newly elected Rampart 
CEO, I'll have additional credibility." 

"Just be careful what questions you let Karl ask you during probing. Remember that 
I'm dead. To Ef Sontag and to everyone else except you and Karl." 

"Surely we'll have to tell Mom and Pop—" 

"Fuck Simon! Don't you dare tell him anything about me or Lee's deposition or 
Dagasatt! That goes for every other member of the Rampart Board of Directors as well. 
For their own safety, if for no other reason." 

"Asa, Mom has got to know. She's slipping away and she refuses to let the doctors do 
anything. If she believed you'd been murdered, it would finish her." 

"All right. Tell Katje right now. But for God's sake impress on her how vital it is to 
keep the information secret. Remember that someone in the family is hand in glove with 
Al-istair Drummond and Galapharma." 

"We don't really know that for certain." 

"Do you want to chance it?" 

She let her intent gaze fall. "No. It fits too well. All right. I promise to beware of the 
unknown ratfink in the Frost bosom." 

"I'm serious about the safety considerations, too. I think you should make a firm 
recommendation that the entire Board of Directors remain on Earth under heavy security. 
Until I nail Schneider or ... we all fall down in six weeks' time. Get the family members 


to stay at the ranch if you can. And when I say family, I don't include Cousin Zed. He'll 
explode into solar orbit when you tell Simon that you want the CEO job. Even if Zed isn't 
the Gala mole, he might try to dry-gulch you out of sheer pique." 

"I'll deal with Zed. Coping with Pop might be more of a problem. He'll demand to 
know why I've changed my mind and want to lead Rampart now that you're dead and 
things look blacker than they ever have." 

"You can tell Simon this much in strict confidence: say that Matt Gregoire has a new 
and important lead on Ollie Schneider and his fugitive associates. Following through will 
require the expenditure of thirty million dollars—" 

"Yikes!" 

"—deliverable to Matt Gregoire immediately. The money has to come from Simon's 
private accounts, not from Rampart." 

"Pop will try to pump Matt, you know." 

"Good luck to him. Just tell him to send a blind EFT draft to her home in Vetivarum 
within six hours. I can't carry out the Dagasatt mission without the cojonudo dinero." 

"You'll get it. Do you need anything else?" 

"Two matters have to be taken care of. Neither will help Rampart, but they may be 
useful additions to the circumstantial evidence proving a Haluk threat." 

"Just tell me." 

"First, the matter of the Haluk cadaver with the human DNA that went to Tokyo for 
study. Get it away from the university researchers and hide it. Xenoaffairs received a 
transcript of the analytical data from Professor Shibuya, but it's been classified Cosmic 
Secret, and SXA might deny its existence. Get another copy from Shibuya and tell her to 
watch her back. You'd better pray that Drummond's spooks haven't gotten to Japan first." 

"Oh, my... Yes, all right. What's the second thing?" 

"More body-snatching. You'll have to find someone dependable to dig up Fake Emily 
and secure the remains. And this time let us pray that her loving brother didn't have her 
cremated before interment in the family plot in Swaledale, North Yorkshire." 

Eve was frowning. "You mean—" 

"Emily Blake Konigsberg's doppelganger, the Haluk demi-clone duplicate of her that 
was accidentally killed in a star-ship accident before it could wreak unspecified mischief. 
No one knew the corpse wasn't human when it was released to her brother." 

"Yes, I recall you telling me about that. I'd completely forgotten ... or perhaps 1 put it 
out of my mind because of the appalling implications. But we never knew for certain 
where the Haluk clone was heading, or what it intended to do." 

"Fake Emily and its mission aren't what really concerns me, Evie. I'm worried that 
there might be other Haluk disguised as humans—and I'd like Ef Sontag to worry about 
them, too. That bastard Elgar planned to duplicate you and me as part of the plot to take 
over Rampart. But if we can believe what Real Emily told us, none of the Galapharma 
agents knew that the Haluk were already copying humans as part of some secret scheme 
of their own." 

"Sontag will have to be told about that even if we don't find the demicloned body. I'll 
see to it. Do you have the brother's name?" 

"Hubert Blake Konigsberg. He's a chemistry prof at some university in Leeds. Emily 
studied there before going out to Stanford in California and becoming a big wheel in 
xenobiology." 


"I'll do a data scan on her burial myself. If the body exists, perhaps your forensic 
friend Beatrice Mangan can advise us on how to have the DNA analyzed." 

"Excellent idea. Those findings should also go to Sontag." I tried to think if I'd 
forgotten anything. If I had, I was past remembering now. "I guess that's about all, sis." 

She grimaced at me in a comical fashion, pushing her human hair away from her face 
with a grotesque alien hand. "All? Oh, Asa!" 

"Hey." I managed to smile back at her. "Up, up, and away, kiddo. Blue Supergal and 
cashiered Supercop, fighting to save the day." 

"There's that," she said in a low voice, the humor suddenly faded away. "But there's 
Rampart, too. For me, at any rate. I know you don't really care about the Starcorp. But the 
thought of losing it to a madman like Alistair Drummond—" 

"Evie," I broke in gently. "Leave Drummond to me." 

She seemed to freeze. Then she whispered, "Can I really do that, Asa? When you 
finish on Dagasatt—" 

"If the mission succeeds, you won't have to worry about me tossing Ollie Schneider 
onto your doorstep while I go back to my old beach-bum lifestyle. I've had enough of 
Drummond's games. He needs burying. Like a rabid skunk. I'm ready to take on the job." 

"Thank you," she said quietly. "Please be careful." 

"Can't do that. But maybe I'll finally get lucky." I touched her image on the screen. 
"Gotta sleep now. Goodbye, sis." 

She nodded and the com unit went to standby. 

I slumped inertly in the office chair, staring at the remains of my supper, wincing in 
embarrassment as my fatigue-drugged brain replayed the John Wayne stand-up-sheriff 
speech I'd just delivered. Had I really said that? 

Yep, I had. 

A wonder Eve hadn't laughed in my face. 

I'd worry about it tomorrow. Like one of the living dead, I shuffled into the back 
room of Mart's office, stepped out of the floppy sneakers and dropped onto the sofa bed, 
not even bothering to open it. 

A rabid skunk... a steak bone .. . dredged up from childhood memories of vacations at 
the Sky Ranch. .. 

It's a late spring evening in the high desert country of the Sierra Ancha. Getting kinda 
chilly. Stars galore, the faint noise of a creek in the canyon below, faraway howl of a 
coyote. There's Simon, tall as a ponderosa pine in his jeans and pearl-snap shirt and 
shearling jacket and old Tony Lama boots and curly-brim Stetson. There's me, no more 
than seven years old but dressed about the same, helping Pop clean up the supper dishes 
before we bed down for the night. 

He'll sleep on the ground beside the dying campfire, long gun at his side, like a real 
cowboy. I'm stuck with a tiny screened pup tent and strict orders from my Mom: "Never 
mind if your father wants to risk a blacktail rattler snuggling inside his bedroll! You sleep 
in that tent, Asa. Do you hear me? And be sure to keep the screen zipped." 

I toss our steak bones and leftover beans and apple cores into the ashes at the edge of 
the fire, zap the last plate clean in the laser stove, and pack the cook kit away. After a 
while Pop and I go off together with a lantern to check on his black stallion, Bandido, and 
my paint pony, Charlie, picketed a couple dozen meters away among some paloverdes 
smothered with blossoms. 


The mounts are fine. Simon and I stand side by side, peeing against the broken trunk 
of a huge dead saguaro cactus looming skeletal in the starlight. Then we go back to the 
campfire. Flickering orange flames illuminate my little tent, which stands on the opposite 
side of the fire with its mesh curtains neatly tied open. 

"Pop! Look!" I freeze in horror. 

Something's inside the tent, sitting on my sleeping bag and gnawing one of the bones 
I'd failed to dispose of properly: an animal smaller than a house cat, dark fur strongly 
blotched and marbled with white. It sees the encroaching humans and does something so 
bizarre as to be nearly unbelievable. 

Leaps into a perfect handstand, body in the air, jittering and bouncing and waving its 
plumy tail. 

"Little spotted skunk," Simon murmurs. 

I'd seen them road-squished, but never alive. The critter is in a frenzy, dropping onto 
all fours for a moment and then standing up on its hands again. It repeats the goofy 
maneuver over and over as I watch, thunderstruck. Then it hisses, picks up the bone and 
resumes chewing. 

"Damn fool kid," says Simon. "Told you to burn up the leftovers." 

"How can we chase it out of there?" I whisper in dismay. "It'll spray stink on my 
sleeping bag—maybe on the saddles and all the rest of our stuff!" 

"Don't move, boy. Stay right where you are. I'll be right back." 

He retreats, taking the lantern, and returns a minute later with one of the dry saguaro 
ribs, over a meter long. Cautiously, he pushes one end of the cactus stick into the fire. He 
grabs his rifle. When the stick blazes up, he takes it in his other hand and moves slowly 
toward the tent with the burning brand held ahead of him. 

The flames come nearer and nearer to the little skunk. It sits petrified for a moment, 
just inside the tent door, then drops the bone and skitters away into the dark desert night. 

"Oh, wow!" I groan. "That was close." 

"Most animals are afraid of fire." Simon makes certain that the skunk is gone. "It was 
acting a mite peculiar. Had me worried." 

"The handstands?" 

"Nope. That's the usual way they warn you off. The nervous twitching and the way it 
hissed is what bothered me. Sometimes a skunk will have rabies. They catch it when 
they're bit by an infected bat. These little spotted guys are normally bold as brass, kinda 
cute, but a rabid one will come runnin' right at you. Crazy fearless, scared of nothing. 
You better be ready to shoot if that happens, and never mind about gettin' stink on you. 
That's the least of your worries! You got to shoot a rabid skunk dead and bury it without 
touching it. Got that, boy?" 

I say, "Yes, Pop." 

"Okay. Go to sleep now." He unstraps his bedroll. 

I kick the stupid steak bone out of my violated shelter and into the center of the 
campfire. Then I zip the mesh curtains shut and lie on my sleeping bag fully clothed, my 
hunting knife clenched in my fist, listening fearfully for the scratching of tiny sharp claws 
against the outer fabric. 

Eventually, my eyes close. 

"Helly?" Rapping, rapping. "Helly?" 

No sooner had I managed to fall asleep than a horrible noise woke me up. I cursed 


and rolled off the sofa and crashed onto the carpeted floor. Ooh, that hurt. More rapping. 
I struggled to my feet and remembered where I was. Limping to the door, I opened it. 
Matt stood there holding a large stack of packages. The big office window behind her still 
showed the luminous dark gray of snowfall in the nightbound city. 

"It's oh-six-hundred," she said. "Here are some fresh clothes. If you'd like to pull 
yourself together, I'll order breakfast for us out here and give you a status report on 
Operation Q." 

"Thanks. Be with you in a sec." 

I retired to the impressive executive John, showered, and got rid of my beard. The 
wounds were much improved, and most of the bruises had responded to treatment and 
were fading to a sickly greenish-purple hue. I ate a few analgesic tablets, combed my hair 
with a towel, and put on the black mock turtleneck, lightweight khaki pants, matching 
short jacket, and the sturdy desert boots Matt had provided. The outfit would serve very 
well for the hot, arid climate of Dagasatt. 

... But how had she known? 

I slouched into her office, scowling. "I suppose Mimo spilled the beans about the 
mission destination." 

"No. It was Eve. When she sent me the funding for your expedition, she told me 
everything but the planet's name, which was easy enough to deduce." 

Someone had rolled in a small table, complete with white linen, elegant place settings 
of silver flatware, and china with the Rampart Starcorp logo. Nothing but the best for top 
management. Matt sat there eating a chilled orange-grapefruit cup. I plopped into a 
waiting chair and poured myself some coffee. 

"Dammit, I wanted this mission totally deniable." 

"Did you seriously think I'd be able to organize the logistics and personnel while you 
kept me completely in the dark?" 

"I was going to take care of things myself. When my brain was back up to speed." I 
broke open an oat-walnut muffin and slathered it with rozkoz confiture. "Didn't you order 
any eggs? Sausage? Ham?" 

"Eat your fruit. It's good for you." 

She had always tried to reform my breakfast menu, which tended toward chuckwagon 
cholesterol. And now that small bit of domesticity was over, too. I felt a sudden awful 
pang of loss and regret. 

"I really missed you back on K-L, Matt." 

Her smile was ambiguous. "Separated five whole days. Or is it six?" 

"That's not the point." 

"The point, Helly, is that it was great fun—but just one of those things. You were a 
marvelous complication in my life. Really marvelous. But a complication all the same. 
Your quitting Rampart was just a—a final denouement to a decision I'd already made 
months earlier." 

"To leave me." The muffin tasted like sawdust and the mellow sweetness of the 
rozkoz had turned cloying. "But we were good together, Matt. Those three weeks we had 
on the island, recuperating from Cravat. You told me then that you loved the place." 

"Eyebrow Cay was wonderful. But not forever. 1 know what I want to do with my 
life. You still haven't figured that out." 

"I'm back with Rampart, if that's what you mean." I tried to keep my tone free of 


sarcasm. 

"Not permanently." 

"For as long as it takes. And I intend to give it my best shot." 

"And then you'll go back to the islands again and vegetate." 

"I didn't sign on to the Starcorp for life, the way you Small Stakeholders do. What 
will you do if Galapharma wins? Stay on in your great new Vice President job under 
Alistair Drum-mond's regime?" 

She flushed at the unfair jab but refused to lose her temper. "Galapharma is not going 
to win." 

"Why don't you come right out and say it, Matt? Even if you do abandon the sinking 
ship, you still wouldn't want to live with me." 

"That kind of a decision would require love on both our parts. And what we had 
together wasn't love at all. We both knew it, Helly. It was plain from the beginning. You 
always held back, never made me feel that you really wanted to know me. Or let me 
know you. Eve says—" She broke off, biting her lip. 

"Go ahead. Tell me what my busybody sister says about my sex life!" 

"This is all beside the point. Let's forget it." She activated a slate and handed it to me. 
"Here's the roster of volunteers. I was only able to recruit three people who fit your 
requirements. All of them are highly qualified." 

Only three? ... But I didn't want to think about that. "Tell me what Eve said about 
me!" 

Matt ignored the question again. "Two of the recruits, Ildiko Szabo and Zorik 
O'Toole, took early retirement from Zone Patrol SWAT units. They're in their middle 
forties. Joe Betancourt is thirty-two, a former ExSec cruiser pilot with extensive combat 
experience. He left Rampart because of a personal conflict with a coworker, but that 
shouldn't affect his ability to work with you. He's been working as a shuttle pilot. None of 
these three have dependents, and they understand the risks involved. All of them have 
had experience with the Qastt. Mimo felt you needed at least one additional person, so he 
drafted Ivor Jenkins, who was very eager to work with you again. God only knows why." 

"Matt! Tell me what my sister said." 

She wouldn't meet my eyes. "Eve is my closest friend, Helly. We worked together for 
nearly ten years on Tyrins. I love her. And she loves you so very much. She and I had 
every right to—" 

"To talk about us?" 

"Why not?" she exclaimed hotly. "You've never been exactly forthcoming about your 
past, have you?" 

"I thought you'd researched all my felonious little secrets pretty thoroughly." 

She shook her head. "That's not the part of your life we spoke about." 

"Then what, for chrissake?" 

"Eve believes you're still in love with your former wife, Joanna." 

"Jesus!" 

Matt plowed ahead. "She said that you were the one who insisted on a divorce after 
your conviction and disenfran-chisement, while Joanna had tried unsuccessfully to 
change your mind, and even wanted to accompany you on your self-imposed exile." 

"Eve had no right—" 

"She also said that you used to wear two wedding rings on a platinum neck chain." 


The furious words died in my throat. Kofi Rutherford had rescued the rings from the 
marauding sea toad's guts. I'd left them in Mimo's safe on Eyebrow Cay when I came 
back to work at Rampart Central, when it seemed that Matt and I... 

I stared at the table. "I'm not in love with Joanna. And she certainly doesn't love me." 

"Whatever you say." Mart's dark eyes were blazing with some emotion I couldn't 
fathom. She rose to her feet abruptly, rattling the coffee cups. 

"Career histories and psychoprofiles of Szabo, O'Toole, and Betancourt are in the 
slate. I've also primed it with all the data we have on the planet Dagasatt—which isn't 
much. Mimo has the money your father forwarded. You'll need a local contact to arrange 
details of the Qastt release at the Justice Center on Nogawa-Krupp, but Mimo says he 
knows somebody. I'll call the operations manager at the Nogawan starport myself and 
have the impounded pirate ship cleaned up and fueled." 

"Matt, can't we—" 

She was standing beside me. "Your crew is waiting for you at Starbase. Good luck, 
Helly. And goodbye." She bent down, took my head in both hands, tilted it up and kissed 
me long and hard. "Now get out of my office. The day's just beginning and I've got work 
to do." 

 

 

Chapter 6 

 

The bad ship Chispa Dos, sporting a new name and newly registered to a citizen with 
known connections to the underworld, made the long journey to the Rampart world of 
Nogawa-Krupp in a phenomenal twenty-two hours, barely enough time for me to work 
out a revised plan of attack, based upon my pared-down personnel roster, and brief the 
team. 

Because they'd been with me on Cravat, Mimo and Ivor Jenkins already knew the 
complex details of Operation Q's background. Prudence dictated that I keep Szabo, 
O'Toole, and Betancourt in the dark about the more sinister aspects of the Haluk 
involvement in the Galapharma plot against Rampart, at least until I knew them better. 
The trio had been aware from the beginning that our mission was both clandestine and 
illegal—which didn't bother them—but they were amateur mercenaries, not pros, and I 
didn't want to confuse them with galactopolitical considerations. The corporate politics of 
the affair were murky enough. 

During our briefings, I informed everybody that we could certainly expect lethal 
opposition from Gala agents and possibly from the Haluk as well. I declined to explain 
why Schneider and the other fugitives were hiding in a Haluk installation on a Qastt 
world. The three newcomers professed not to give a damn. 

Actually, the team orientation sessions went very well except for one notable fly in 
the ointment. Zorik O'Toole took me aside after our first meeting and sternly asked me if 
I was "that" Asahel Frost. I admitted I was, and wanted to know if it was a problem for 
him. He said probably not. I said that if he'd prefer to withdraw, I could always arrange 
his passage home from N-K. He pointed out that he needed money and I needed him, so 
he'd stick with the team, subject to reviewing the situation if unspecified "difficulties" 
arose. 

We left it at that. But I wondered—with good reason, as it turned out—whether 


keeping him on was a serious mistake. 

Optimist that I was, I had hoped we could touch down briefly on N-K, grab the 
Squeak pirates and their ship, and zoom off to invade Dagasatt. To expedite matters, 
Mimo had contacted a Nogawan shyster of his acquaintance before we left Seriphos and 
hired him to process the legal paperwork connected with the prisoner release. The lawyer 
had promised to have the Qastt pirates ready to hand over when we landed. 

Eleven hours had gone by since then, proving the ancient rule of "hurry up and wait." 
Chispa Dos still sat in the transient spacecraft holding area of the N-K spaceport, the 
pirates were still in jail, and the wheels of the overloaded Nogawan justice system were 
grinding with glacial slowness. 

Joe Betancourt, the former Rampart ExSec fighter pilot, was aboard the impounded 
Qastt starship, waiting for the takeoff order. He was a quiet moody little guy with an air 
of invincible confidence, who knew all about weird xeno crates. He'd even served on a 
prize crew that had brought a Squeak bandit in. Joe had told me that his ambition was to 
operate a sky-shuttle service on a pretty freesoil world called Chaguaramas, back in the 
Orion Arm. His fee for the mission would put a down payment on his dream. 

Mimo, Ivor, Zorik O'Toole, and Ildiko Szabo were playing poker in the forward 
salon, unwinding from a series of tedious documentary holovids on Qastt culture. I was in 
Chispa's wardroom, silting at a table studying the systems schematics of a medium-sized 
Qastt aircraft called a tuqo, commonly used as a Squeak emergency vehicle. My revised 
plan called for us to steal and use one on Dagasatt, and although Mimo had assured me he 
would be able to fly it with ease, I wanted to check the thing out myself. 

 

Outside Chispa's large view window, a mist-laden drizzle hid most of Nogawa-Krupp 
Starport. It was early evening. I'd visited the planet only once before, during the earlier 
fruitless search for Schneider, and at the time I couldn't get away fast enough. An 
unattractive, foggy-bottom sort of place out near the tip of the Perseus Spur, N-K had 
cloudy skies that never stopped weeping and soupy air with too much carbon dioxide for 
human comfort. The most prominent feature of the local biota was a species of tree that 
had foliage like purple noodles. I also recalled that leeches with teeth were apt to pop out 
of puddles and nibble your boots as you walked about the bustling capital city. 

One single natural resource made this dreary planet supremely desirable to Rampart 
Interstellar Corporation: the richest platinum-group ore body in Zone 23. 

A brisk knock sounded on the wardroom door. Mimo stuck his head in. "The lawyer's 
here. To explain the delay. We've got trouble." 

"Never would have guessed it." Sighing, I put away the schematic printouts. "Send 
him in." 

A florid-faced chap of mature years, wearing a handsome Barbour rainjacket over 
custom-made business attire, bounded in and pumped my hand with enthusiasm. 
"Delighted to meet you, Captain Icicle! Cadwallader Cassini, Esquire, at your service. 
Always happy to do business with a friend of Guillermo Bermudez. What a fantastic 
ship! I don't believe I've ever seen such a luxurious interior. How many ross can you 
squeeze out of her?" 

"Over sixty." Actually, the hyperspace cruise capability of the prototype was closer to 
seventy-two light-years per hour, but I didn't want to advertise it. "Please take a seat, 
counselor. Why don't you tell me what seems to be the difficulty with the Qastt 


prisoners." 

His cheery demeanor cooled a couple of degrees. "Well, to put it in a nutshell, they 
don't want to be released into your custody." 

"What the hell?" Of all the potential screw-ups, I'd never anticipated one like this. 
"Do you mean they have a choice?" 

"Apparently there's an obscure stargoing-Insap rights clause under Statute 44 that 
applies even to convicted felons." 

"Well, what's the beef?" 

"I'm afraid I still don't understand their objections fully. The Qastt language—all 
those squeals and whistles and peeps—isn't processed very well by the mechanical 
translator, you know. Yesterday, after Captain Bermudez sent your authorization, I took 
care of the transfer of the twelve million dollar draft to cover the fine, forfeiture, and 
incarceration expenses, vessel impoundment fee, board and lodging, service charges, and 
Zone tax. Then I visited the prisoners in the PJC—the Planetary Justice Center—to tell 
them the good news about their impending freedom. Naturally, I thought they'd be 
delighted. Instead, they seemed terrified at the prospect of going away with you." 

"You told them that we were unofficial agents of the Qastt Great Congress?" 

"As I was instructed. The leader—his name is Ba-Karkar—declared that the Congress 
would never authorize humans to pay their ransom. He seemed to believe ..." Cassini 
hesitated. "He seemed to believe that he and his people would be in mortal jeopardy if 
they were remanded into your custody." 

"Shit," I said. The damned Squeakers probably thought we were Galapharma goons in 
cahoots with the Haluk. These pirates had let themselves be captured with an 
incriminating Haluk passenger aboard their ship. Maybe the penalty for that was death. 

Cadwallader Cassini remained blandly silent. The disastrous cover story was my 
mistake, but a prudent solicitor doesn't rub the client's nose in it. 

"There's only one way to resolve this matter," I told him. "I'll have to talk to the Qastt 
myself." 

"I'm sorry, Captain Icicle. Only legal advocates or Rampart Security personnel are 
allowed to interview alien detainees in the PJC." 

I smiled and rose from the table, signaling to Cadwallader Cassini that the conference 
was over. "Trust me, counselor. That won't be a problem. You just carry on with what 
you were doing." 

"Actually, all of the legal work is complete except for activating the voucher of 
remand." 

"I'll want to do that personally. Do you have the document with you?" 

He handed over a data-dime in its little envelope. "Right here. It's irregular, but I 
suppose—" 

"Excellent!" I picked up the intercom unit. "Mimo, will you come to the wardroom, 
please? Counselor Cassini is ready to receive his fee. And please tell Ivor, Zorik, and 
Ildiko to stand by for a foray into town. We'll need some ground transport." 

The lawyer said, "If you intend to go to the PJC immediately, I should warn you that 
it's Saturday night on Nogawa-Krupp. The place is apt to be rather busy. All those fun-
loving miners, you know." 

"Thanks for warning me. It's been a pleasure, counselor." 

I passed him on to Mimo. The other three members of my merry band were waiting in 


a jellybean van on the wet tarmac by the time I'd collected my coat and hat and a few 
other necessary things. 

Ildiko Szabo was driving. I took the seat beside her. "Where to, Helly?" she inquired. 

"To the local slammer. They call it the PJC." 

She told the van our destination and we roared off into the night. 

Half an hour later four arrogant offworlders came swaggering into the crowded 
Nogawa-Krupp Planetary Justice Center. They shoved their way through a mob of soggy 
Rampart ExSec officers, suspects both cowed and belligerent, shysters in fancy 
stormwear trying to calm agitated clients, and depressed-looking relatives and friends of 
the recently apprehended. Indignant shouts broke out from those who were shouldered 
aside, but the pushy quartet moved forward as relentlessly as a human landslide. Its 
apparent leader was a tall rogue who wore a floor-length oilskin drover's coat over a tan 
ranchman's outfit, a dripping Stetson with a snakeskin band, scanner-defying mirrored 
glasses, and peace-bonded sidearms. 

As he neared the armored dispatch and reception booth, the gunslinger bellowed, 
"Stand aside! I got me a court order here. Gonna spring my poor li'l amigos outta this 
jerkwater joint right now!" 

The crowd muttered ominously. One furious lawyer, who'd had his Chasseur-booted 
foot stomped on, exclaimed, "Who the bloody hell do you think you are, elbowing into 
the line like this?" 

"I think I'm ahead of you? chuckled the cowboy, with studied insolence. 

Angry growls from the throng. A learned obscenity from the lawyer. Snickers from 
the cowboy's oddly assorted companions. One was a woman. Two were men. 

Inside the booth, the InSec dispatch sergeant slowly looked up from her computer. 
She was a strawberry-blonde about forty years old and her eyes were hard and 
knowledgeable. The name tag on her left breast said KENNELLY, J. Shielded from the 
importunate crush by everything-proof windows, she spoke through an annunciator in a 
bored voice. "Take a number, citizen. Wait your turn." 

"Number? I don't need no stinkin' number!" The tall cowboy whipped a Rampart Red 
Card from his breast pocket and pressed it against the glass. "I got this." 

The affronted lawyer with the mashed foot turned away without another word. Bitter 
babbling arose from the disappointed crowd. "Hot shit honcho... big noise from Central... 
korpo kuhnockers throwing their fuckin' weight around." 

The dispatch sergeant rolled her eyes. VIPs were always a pain in the ass. This one 
and his associates looked to be even more anally agonizing than most. The Red Card 
checked out. It was issued to one Helmut Icicle and enjoined every person employed by 
Rampart Starcorp to cooperate fully with the bearer under pain of instant dismissal and 
disenfranchisement. 

"What is your business with us tonight, Counselor Icicle?" 

The long drink of water with the obnoxious grin didn't bother to correct her 
misperception of his professional status. "Me and my posse are here to bail out some 
detainees." 

"Do you have a remand microdisk with the names and case numbers of your clients?" 

An envelope was flourished. "There you go, Sergeant Ken-nelly. What's the J stand 
for?" 

She ignored the question. "Please insert the dime into the data input receiver below. 


And would you please take off your eyeglasses for iris ID verification?" 

"Nope. Don't need to, with a Red Card. You forget that, Sergeant Kennelly, J?" 

"Thank you," she said obscurely. 

The cowpoke's companions also wore scannerproof glasses. One of the men was of 
very modest physical stature and stood stiffly erect, feet apart and hands clasped behind 
his back in a military "at ease" posture. He had an almost lipless mouth and a gray 
military moustache. His expression was fiercely intent. The spacer's coverall and billed 
cap that he wore had no insignia, but they were almost identical in their cut and dark blue 
color to those worn by CHW Zone Patrol. He carried a black leather case. 

The woman beside him was the only other armed member of the quartet, equipped 
not only with bonded sidearms, but also with an Allenby SM-440 magnum-flechette stun 
carbine in a dorsal scabbard. The vaguely Oriental cast of her broad face was 
contradicted by tightly cropped straw-colored hair, dotted with raindrops. She was of 
medium height and wore a baggy ensemble of desert-camo Repeltex. One metal toecap of 
her ballistic-cloth boots still had a forlorn leech clinging to it. 

The fourth intruder, a titanic young man in his early twenties whose demeanor was 
sweetly shy, stood two hundred centimeters tall and might have weighed in at 160 kilos. 
None of his awesome mass was fat. Overdeveloped pectorals and deltoids threatened to 
burst the seams of his wet workout jersey, which bore the logo PROPERTY OF IVOR'S 
ATHLETIC CLUB—VETIVARUM—xxxxL. He wore a Sony EMS-3 myo-stimulator collar 
capable of augmenting his muscle power by a factor of three. 

"Remand data transfer from Magistrate's Court is complete," the sergeant said, 
studying her computer display. "But I note that the Qastt prisoners have declined to place 
themselves in your custody." 

"Why don't I just have a word with my little buddies and clear up the 
misunderstanding," the cowboy suggested with a grin. "You want to roust 'em into an 
interview room for me, Sergeant Kennelly, J, ma' am? " 

She addressed her computer mike. Following a brief pause, a map projection 
appeared on the armored window. "Very well, counselor. Your associates will have to 
wait here, but you may proceed to Visitation 3, the room indicated in blue on the 
directory. Your clients will be waiting." 

The magical Red Card appeared again. The cowboy was no longer smiling. "My 
associates will not wait here. They'll go with me." 

"As you wish. Have a nice day, counselor ... or whoever the hell you are. Next!" 

We moved through corridors swarming with uniformed Rampart Security personnel, 
civilians, even detainees in acid-green jumpsuits who wandered blithely at large with 
electronic monitors clamped about their upper arms. 

"Wasn't that performance of yours a bit over the top, Chief?" Zorik O'Toole remarked 
to me. 

"Just thought I'd have a little fun. Won't hurt if the local yokels think we're a gang of 
Rampart Central clowns." 

"Hmmm." The face of my new colleague was eloquent with disapproval. "I still think 
we might have been less obtrusive. But it's your call." 

I thought: Damn right it is, and don't you forget it. 

O'Toole's dossier had checked out five-star. A sawed-off Napoleon type, he was a 
former SWAT unit commander in Zone Patrol, retired two years ago with a list of valor 


commendations as long as my arm. He'd willingly put aside writing his memoirs and 
joined up. His early retirement pension wasn't adequate to sustain his preferred lifestyle; 
and besides, no Earthside publisher seemed to be interested in a book about law 
enforcement among the boondock Perseus planets. 

Our other patrol recruit, Ildiko Szabo, had made lieutenant before she left the service. 
Her retirement occupation was listed as Floriculturist, Wholesale. She'd had considerable 
experience dealing with Qastt captives face-to-face, and her stories about irascible 
Squeaker pirates she had known were both amusing and discouraging. Ildiko opined that 
Operation Q might be in for a tough time of it on Dagasatt. 

Ivor Jenkins had shared the Cravat mission with Matt, Mimo, and me while AWOL 
from his low-paying job as a junior bodybuilder. Rampart rewarded him so generously 
after Eve's rescue that he was able to open his own gym. But being a businessman was 
harder work than the young man had anticipated, and he said he was overjoyed when 
Mimo invited him on another adventure. I had reservations about Ivor's participation that 
I kept to myself. He was only twenty-three, and he'd barely escaped with his life from the 
caves of Cravat. It didn't seem fair to put a nonprofessional like him in jeopardy again. If 
there had been anyone else available for our team, I would have insisted that Ivor Jenkins 
stay home on Seriphos with his barbells and Nautili. On the other hand, he was not only 
strong, but seriously smart. He knew how to cook, too, and had already put his talents to 
work for us in Chispa's magnificent galley. 

We found Visitation 3 on the floor below, just outside the main cellblock, and filed 
inside. The Qastt hadn't arrived yet. 

The room was about four meters square. Its walls and ceiling were finished in glossy 
beige enamel like the inside of a refrigerator, and the beige tile floor had a central drain. 
Hard plastic chairs and a long conference table were solidly bolted down. Maybe the 
place was hosed down and disinfected after each visit, like public toilet cubicles. 

"Sweep it," I told O'Toole. 

He took an electronic bug-detector from his black case and prowled around, 
brandishing the device and scowling. "Clean," he said at last. 

We arranged ourselves in chairs on one side of the table and waited. After a few 
minutes an inner door slid open. A guard ushered four entities inside, consulted a 
magslate, and whispered: 

"Prisoners Ba-Karkar, Ogu, Tisqatt, and Tu-Prak are authorized to confer with 
Counselor Helmut Icicle and party of three." 

"That's us," I declared, flashing a hearty smile. The Qastt, who were wearing 
translator pendants, huddled together and glared. 

The guard studied his slate. He seemed to be suffering from laryngitis. "Urn ... says 
here the Qastt have been processed for release pending final activation of a voucher of 
remand, which they've refused to eyeball." He shook his head. "That's one for the books." 

"Let me talk to them," I said. "It's only a misunderstanding. I'll clear it up in a jiffy." 

"You'd better," the guard murmured on his way out. "Or these inmates go right back 
to their cells. Press the call-pad when you get things sorted out." He closed the door. 

I had never met any Qastt before. They were only about a hundred and twenty 
centimeters tall, almost humanoid, dressed in garish chartreuse jailhouse jumpsuits that 
hung loosely on their twiggy frames. Their pink-skinned faces had sharp little noses and 
close-set golden eyes with peculiar cross-shaped pupils. Bloated cheeks gave them an 


uncanny resemblance to gophers with their mouths stuffed full of food. They had no 
external ears, but twin organs like bottlebrushes that served as auditory sensors sprouted 
from the top of their hairless heads. The antennae differed in shape and color on each 
individual. 

I pasted a big shit-eating grin on my face and said, "Hello there! Which one of you is 
Ba-Karkar?" 

The Qastt remained frozen. Finally the one with the lumpiest cheeks and large black 
skull-brushes uttered a prolonged, grating shriek. His mechanical translator decoded its 
approximate meaning: 

"Castrate you, boomer! May you putrefy!" 

Talk about a failure of communication. 

"Helly, let me try. I've had experience with them." Ildiko Szabo rose from her seat 
and approached the diminutive aliens very slowly. She placed both hands over her mouth, 
then removed them and whispered, "Holy silence be to you all." 

"To you also," squeaked the Qastt who stood closest to the lumpy-cheeked 
nutcracker. The brushes on this one's head were frilly and coral-red, and its eyes were 
slightly larger than those of the others. 

Ildiko sank down onto her haunches so that she and the entity were eye-to-eye. "My 
leader apologizes for loudspeaking," she breathed. "He did not understand that it is 
hurtful. Please let him talk to you. He is not an enemy. He wants to help you. He wants to 
set you free." 

Coral Brushes gave a kind of hiccup. "Untranslatable expression of fearful 
skepticism." 

I stood up and repeated the mouth-covering gesture, then whispered, "Let's begin 
again." I beckoned to Ivor and Zorik O'Toole. They followed my lead as I tiptoed away 
from the intimidating table and too-tall chairs and sat on the floor with my back to one of 
the walls. 

Ildiko joined us. "Speak slowly and simply," she told me. "Avoid figures of speech 
and idioms." 

I pointed to Lumpy Cheeks and said softly, "Are you the one called Ba-Karkar?" 

He glowered wordlessly and finally said, "Yes. I Ba-Karkar, corsair captain." 

"Please come closer. All of you. Let us speak." 

Reluctantly, the Qastt complied. They stood in a ragged line, with Ba-Karkar and 
Coral Brushes to the fore. 

I whispered, "Thank you. Now please tell me: Why do you refuse to be set free?" 

"You not agents of Qastt Great Congress," the irritable little pirate captain said. 
"Guard lie when he say human Congress agents pay ransom, come take us home. 
Humans never do this! Who you? What you really want?" 

"Call me Asahel. You are correct. I am not an agent of the Great Congress. This was 
a misunderstanding. But I will pay your ransom and set you free. If you agree to help 
me." 

"Help putrid boomer humans? No! Never!" 

Coral Brushes kicked him in the shin and addressed me in a voice like an eager, 
cheeping bird. "Really free? No more putrid human odor in horrid damp air? No more 
garbage food? No more boomer guards bully us? Really really free?" 

"Yes," I said. "If you help us, I'll take you home." 


"No!" Ba-Karkar screeched. His antennae were vibrating in fury. "You lie, boomer 
Asahel!" 

"Rest in holy silence," Coral Brushes told him waspishly. Then to me: "What kind 
help you want?" 

Ildiko Szabo said, "Please. Who are you?" 

"I Ogu, wife and partner to Corsair Captain Ba-Karkar." 

Uh-oh. A crack in the dike! 

"This putrid abomination," he blatted cantankerously. "This undermines my authority. 
This significantly diminishes my pride." 

"Untranslatable!" his wife shrilled. "Eight human equivalent months we stay putrid 
prison. No ransom comes. You say it comes soon. It not come. You want die here? Not 
me! Not Tisqatt orTu-Prak, either. Ask them!" 

The other two Qastt hiccuped diffidently. One had molting buff-colored brushes, and 
the other's vibrissae were slate-blue. They showed no inclination to join in the marital 
spat. 

I said, "I will tell you why your ransom didn't come: because you carried a Haluk on 
your ship. This made my people very angry. The ransom was refused." 

"Eeeeee," sighed the Qastt. 

"But Haluk say pay me double for quick transfer of untranslatable human cargo," Ba-
Karkar crabbed. "This why ride." 

Ogu made a sound like a throttled sparrow. "So now we stay prison for ever? Greedy 
untranslatable epithet you!" 

"It doesn't have to be that way," I pointed out. "I'm a very powerful and important 
human. I'll pay the ransom and get you out of here. But you must promise to help me." 

"Tisqatt?" Ildiko Szabo whispered. "Tu-Prak? What do you say about this?" 

"They say nothing!" the little captain raged. "They only putrid gunner, ship engineer. 
I, Ba-Karkar, must speak for all!" 

Ogu kicked him again. "Then ask what kind help Asahel wants, untranslatable epithet 
male. Or no more untranslatable for you! Never again in putrid boomer prison." 

Her husband gave a choked gasp. "Cruel female!" 

"No more sex, either," she added. 

The pirate leader's golden eyes squeezed shut. His defiant black bristles collapsed into 
flaccid snarls on his bald pate. He chirred almost inaudibly, and the translator decoded: 
"Misery. This what happens when poor hardworking corsair listens to putrid rich Haluk." 

"Yes," I agreed. "Haluk bring misfortune to Qastt and humans alike." 

His eyes popped open. "Asahel, what?" 

"I hate the Haluk," I murmured. "Let me tell you why. They give shelter to my 
enemies. My human enemies. I want to punish my enemies, but they're hiding with the 
Haluk. This is why I want your help. My enemies are hiding with the Haluk on the Qastt 
planet Dagasatt, near a place called Taqtaq." 

"Impossible," scoffed Ba-Karkar. 

Scraggly Buff Brushes contradicted his boss softly. "Not." 

Ba-Karkar whirled around to confront the crewman. "Tisqatt, you know what this 
human speaks about?" 

"I once live Akakoqoq, city at edge Great Bitumen Desert same like Taqtaq. 
Everyone know Haluk build untranslatable facility in desert. Dangerous weapons guard 


facility. No ordinary Qastt person can go near. Haluk kill bonehunters, others who try. 
Some say that castrating Haluk pay Qastt Great Congress significant money to allow 
facility on Dagasatt that too dangerous to build on Haluk world. Putrid scandal, but you 
know politicians." 

I knew. Everywhere in the galaxy, on human and non-human worlds alike, there were 
always slimy boodlers ready to deal. 

"What kind of a facility?" I asked. 

"Untranslatable. It significantly large." 

"Is this Haluk facility near Taqtaq Starport?" 

"Not very near," Tisqatt said. "Human distance equivalent from Taqtaq 922.2 
kilometers. Much farther from Akakoqoq." 

I said, "I want to go to Dagasatt and look for my enemies. I want you to help me get 
to Taqtaq." 

"Impossible!" The Qastt captain semaphored his vibrissae violently. 

Ogu silenced him with a vicious chirp. "Explain precisely what kind help you want, 
Asahel." 

I did. The whole bunch broke out in horrified squealing. Ba-Karkar banged his little 
fists against his chest and shrilled, "No! No! No! Castrate you and your companions also! 
That plan of action unacceptable. It seditious. It putrid. It get us into significant trouble." 

Shrugging, I said, "You can go back to jail if you prefer. No more sex and no more 
untranslatable." 

Holy silence fell. I let him stew for a minute. 

"Ba-Karkar," I whispered at last. "I swear we won't deliberately harm you or any 
innocent Qastt on Dagasatt. There will be some danger. We can't avoid that. But I will do 
my best to keep you and your people safe. The only ones who will surely suffer from this 
operation are the conniving politicians, the Haluk, and our human enemies." 

"Putrid castrators!" he snarled. 

I wasn't sure if he was referring to the Qastt pols, the Haluk, Ollie and the wiseguys, 
or us. Probably all four. 

Smelling victory, I played my trump card. "Help us and I'll let you have your starship 
back after the raid." 

"Starship!" He was aghast. "You say humans not demolish my beautiful ship while 
we in putrid prison?" 

Rampart routinely chopped up captured xeno privateers for scrap before releasing the 
ransomed crews. During the early stages of our hunt for Eve, I'd told Matt to hang on to 
this particular pirate craft and its people, thinking they might hold some clue to my 
sister's disappearance. Then I'd completely forgotten the poor jailed Squeakers—until 
Eve herself had recalled them to mind. 

"Except for the guns, your ship is pretty much intact," I told Ba-Karkar. "It's fueled 
and ready to fly. What do you say?" 

The pirate captain's small head tilted to one side. His bulging cheeks rippled, as 
though he were munching nuts. God only knows what the mannerism signified. Finally 
he spoke with sly insinuation. "You pay us significant money also?" 

"Don't push your putrid luck, peewee!" I hissed. "No more pussyfooting around. Are 
you in or fuckin' out?" 

Ba-Karkar blinked. "Your boomer comments not translatable. But 1 comprehend 


nevertheless. I think we cooperate." 

I gave a profound exhalation of relief. "Right. Just let me call the guard and arrange 
for finalizing your release. Then we'll go to the starport." I pointed to Zorik O'Toole. 
"This man and I are going to ride with you and Tisqatt in your ship. Another human will 
also go with us and pilot your ship to Dagasatt. Our own armed vessel will follow 
closely. Ogu and Tu-Prak will ride in our ship." 

"Not separate me and husband!" Ogu pleaded. 

"I'm sorry, Ogu. I wish we could trust you. But Qastt people and humans have been 
antagonists for too long. You and Tu-Prak will be hostages for the good behavior of Ba-
Karkar and Tisqatt." 

"I think this human can ride Qastt ship." Ba-Karkar indicated Zorik. "But not you." 

"I'm going." I smacked my sidearms, having had a bellyful of Squeak intransigence. 
"No more arguments, dammit!" 

"He not argue," Ogu cheeped. "Translation bad. He means if you ride, you sorry." 

And I was, too. 

Have you ever visited a kindergarten class where all the furniture and even the rest 
room fixtures are miniaturized for the tiny children, and you feel like Gulliver trapped in 
a doll-house? Well, the Squeaker pirate ship was sort of like that to a man of my bulk and 
altitude. Low overheads, narrow little corridors, a cramped flight bridge with toy 
instrument consoles and command seats so dinky I couldn't cram my butt into one to save 
my life. God knows how Rampart ExSec ever brings in captured Qastt ships. 

Maybe the members of the prize crews are all runts like Betancourt and O'Toole. 
They coped beautifully. Joe piloted the alien starship and Zorik kept an eye on our two 
alien passengers. Meanwhile, 1 crouched in the deactivated weapon-system cubicle just 
behind the flight deck during the five interminable hours it took the privateer to reach 
Dagasatt, poking along at its maximum pseudovelocity of forty-one ross. Chispa Dos 
tagged behind, throttled back, while Mimo kept the tractor-beam generator and photon 
cannons at the ready in case Ba-Karkar and Tisqatt tried anything cute aboard the bandit. 

They didn't—unless you count ripping off the hated human-style jail uniforms and 
stuffing them into the matter converter to the tune of malevolent chirps. Then they 
dressed themselves in voluminous white garments that resembled Bedouin robes 
augmented with floaty gauze scarves. I already knew about these typical robes from the 
Qastt cultural orientation holovids, and since they had an excellent potential for disguise 
and weighed almost nothing, I had Mimo duplicate a set for each of us, using Chispa's 
malle-armoire unit. 

In addition to changing their costume, the two mini-buccaneers also drenched 
themselves with xeno perfume to counteract our disgusting human stench. After they 
finished their toilette, the pirate tub smelled like a cross between a crude-oil cracking 
plant and a Tijuana cathouse. Zorik O'Toole and I nearly coughed our brains out until Joe 
flushed the environmental system with a blast of pure oxygen. I confiscated the perfume 
flasks for the rest of the trip. 

After Ba-Karkar programmed his ship's navigator with the entry codes for the 
Dagasatt solar system, there was very little more he could, or would, do to help us, so we 
let him go off and sulk in his teeny-weeny captain's cabin for the rest of the flight. 
Meanwhile Zorik and I pumped Tisqatt, the gunner, for useful information about the 
planet of his birth. 


Much older than his cross-grained skipper, Tisqatt was a milder and more obliging 
soul. He told us what he knew about the Great Bitumen Desert, then willingly called up a 
detailed chart projection of the region from the pirate ship's database, which was in such 
an appalling state of confusion that Joe had given up on it early in the game. 

The mysterious Haluk facility wasn't shown on the map printout—no surprise—but 
Tisqatt indicated its approximate position in the far northeastern corner of the strange 
land-form. The desert was sprinkled with cautionary notices warning of unstable and 
hazardous surface conditions. 

Zorik and I conferred and debated the various options for carrying out Mission Q 
without getting caught, consulting frequently with our tiny pal, who gave useful input on 
the groundside emergency procedures we intended to subvert during the penetration. 
Finally, after a lot of second-guessing of my tactics on Zorik's part, we firmed things 
up—including the best spot for the crash. 

"But I think Corsair Captain not like," Tisqatt warned timidly. 

I grinned at him. "We not give damn." 

Zorik fetched Ba-Karkar. I showed him the printout of the Great Bitumen Desert and 
told him what his role was going to be in the upcoming charade. It was more complex—
and more hazardous—than the earlier scenario I had spun for him back in Visitation 3 on 
Nogawa-Krupp. 

As predicted, he raged, cursed untranslatably, smote his little chest, and told me that 
the plan was significantly idiotic. When he subsided, we all rested in holy silence for a 
long time. 

Then I spoke, reminding him of the freedom now nearly within his grasp. I allowed as 
how we could probably carry out our plan without his active cooperation, but the 
operation would then be even more dangerous. And more likely to leave poor Ogu a 
widow, since Ba-Karkar would have to accompany us anyhow. . . with a gun pointed at 
his head. 

The gopher cheeks were munching tentatively again. "Asahel, you say only I must go 
with you to Dagasatt surface. Ogu and other Qastt crew can stay safe in orbit on human 
ship." 

"That's right. Ivor and Ildiko and Mimo will join you and me and Zorik in this vessel. 
Joe andTisqatt will transfer to the human ship where Ogu and Tu-Prak are. The human 
ship has a dissimulator mechanism—a way to hide its shape. It will wait in a distant orbit. 
No one on Dagasatt will see it. If we are killed on the planet, then Joe will fly your three 
people home. If we succeed, you will have not only your freedom but also your ship to 
keep." 

The Qastt captain turned away from me and gazed somberly at the bridge's main 
viewer. We were rushing through the sparsely strewn stars of the Spur's tip, the uttermost 
part of the Milky Way Galaxy. The indeciperable ideographs of the alien instrumentation 
were transposed into human parameters by a portable navigator unit Joe had spliced into 
the console. We were presently three light-years from Dagasatt, ETA four and a half 
minutes. 

In the viewscreen's upper right corner was a faint ball of fuzzy diamond dust, the 
satellite star-cluster over seventeen thousand light-years distant that was the original 
home of the Haluk race. Ba-Karkar pointed to it. 

"Only twenty human equivalent years before humans come," he said, "Qasst own 


Perseus Spur. No other star-traveling people here. We move from planet to planet, 
colonize slowly. Then Haluk come from out there, invade our stars, take one two three 
four planets, very quiet. We not know. Soon Haluk become bold, not so quiet anymore. 
They take eleven planets, tell us we can colonize no more. They despise us. They rich, we 
poor. They never share. When they trade, they cheat us. Haluk stop taking more planets 
only when humans come. Humans tell Haluk and Qastt: Now all useful planets where 
you not already live belong to humans! If you try take, we kill you. You believe this good 
and correct, Asahel?" 

I said, "No. I believe it's neither good nor correct. But the human government doesn't 
care what 1 think. I am only one man." 

"Zorik. You believe this good and correct?" 

"Yes," said O'Toole matter-of-factly. 

Ba-Karkar asked Joe Betancourt the same question. The pilot said, "I don't know 
whether it's good and correct or not. I do know that human science is stronger than Qastt 
or Haluk science, and strong people often take what they want." 

"Significant," said Ba-Karkar. "This why strong people feared by people not so 
strong." 

"Some humans," I said carefully, "want to help people who are not so strong. Share 
science. Undertake honest trade." 

The pirate hiccuped. The machine said, "Untranslatable expression of fearful 
skepticism." 

Zorik O'Toole shot me a look and chuckled. "You want to go down that road, Chief, 
you're gonna need a lot better map than the one you got." 

"This not translatable," Ba-Karkar said. 

"You don't know the half, little buddy," I told him. 

The Qastt navigation unit gave a gentle triple ping. The main viewer went white as 
the ship dropped out of ultralu-minal drive and exited hyperspace. An instant later the 
view-screen showed a yellowish sun and the apparently motionless red-blue-and-white 
crescent of a sizable T-2 planet blotched with clouds. 

"Dagasatt," said Joe Betancourt laconically. "Gee-synch orbit five hundred kay 
kilometers, beyond casual landside detection range of known Q equipment. No artificial 
sats in evidence. Chispa matching our intrinsic vee and closing in for docking and 
transfer." 

"Will you help us?" I asked the little pirate. 

He said, "You show me again printout of Great Bitumen Desert. Then I decide if your 
untranslatable plan can work." 

 

 

Chapter 7 

 

Our landing party crammed itself into the tiny privateer, and at one point 1 jokingly 
suggested that we might have to strap Ivor to the outside, like an elk carcass lashed to a 
pickup truck. The young giant took the joshing in good humor and finally found a place 
in the cargo bay among the pods of weaponry, assault gear, and supplies. Ildiko and Zorik 
huddled in the Qastt messroom while Mimo stayed on the flight deck and I took my 
previous position among the dead weaponry controls. 


Ba-Karkar was in the command seat. He had said he would cooperate, under strong 
protest, with the condition that we allow him to select the precise landing site within a 
more broadly drawn target area. 

Joe Betancourt wished us good luck as he withdrew Chispa's docking tunnel. The 
Y700 drifted away into space, her external ID and transponder code illegally blanked out 
so she couldn't be identified. With the dissimulator on, the star-ship was virtually 
invisible so long as she stayed in orbit or traveled at minimum sublight velocity. I knew 
for a fact that the more advanced Haluk/Bodascon starship hybrids had dissim-detect 
capability; but the Haluk themselves were still unskilled in the equipment's use—they 
had failed to spot Mimo in Plomazo on a couple of occasions—and I was confident that 
Joe would be able to hide Chispa successfully while we carried out the first phase of 
Operation Q. 

Later on, if Galapharma hotshots got wind of our invasion and came sniffing around, 
all bets might be off. 

We were taking two portable CL-4 lasercoms with us, as well as a number of personal 
LC units. Using orbiting Chispa as a satellite relay, the communications system was 
undetectable by all but the most advanced type of sensors—at least during the daytime. 
We'd use it at night only in case of a major emergency event such as a call for an 
evacuation via Chispa's gig. 

The privateer began its descent to Dagasatt. I was still not sure that we could trust Ba-
Karkar completely, so I kept the holster of my Ivanov stun-pistol unfastened while I 
crouched behind him. He followed orders well enough, breaking orbit and guiding his 
ship manually through the outer atmosphere, but his responses to my attempts at friendly 
chitchat were grudging and curt. The Qastt's bottlebrush antennae had gone droopy again, 
which I took as an indication of deep anxiety. 

Hey, in his position I'd have been depressed, too. 

When Mimo saw that I was getting nowhere in my attempts to calm the alien, he gave 
me an almost imperceptible signal and took over the small talk himself. He told Ba-
Karkar about his own background as a smuggler and scofflaw, which instantly made him 
muy simpatico in the skipper's eyes, and spoke of his experiences trading contraband on 
various Qastt worlds. He apologized for my brusque manner even more elaborately than 
Ildiko had done, trying to excuse me by painting a highly exaggerated picture of my 
importance in Rampart Starcorp. This emboldened the pirate to once again bring up his 
hope of a bonus payment. 

"You and Asahel give me money in addition to starship," he said to Mimo, doing the 
cheek-munch grimace again, "I not only cooperate, I cooperate significantly" 

I nodded my agreement above Ba-Karkar's head. After all, my father was the one 
who'd pay, not me. Mimo went into a long rigamarole of bargaining and a sum was 
finally agreed upon. The flight-deck ambience perked up noticeably after that, along with 
the little Qastt bandit's auditory antennae. 

Money: maybe not a universal solvent of life's intestinal blockages, but it does make 
the shitclogs more bearable. 

Because of technical limitations in our translator equipment, Mimo and I were able to 
understand only Ba-Karkar's side of the routine space-to-ground transmissions during 
reentry; but he appeared to be proceeding in a straightforward manner. He requested 
permission to land at Taqtaq Auxiliary Starport and it was granted. As part of our plan, he 


also notified Ground Control that his ship's subluminal powerplant was behaving 
somewhat erratically, although he was not yet prepared to declare an emergency. The 
controller told him he could descend to thirteen thousand meters, a lower altitude than 
normal for starship approach. His vector would be monitored closely by Taqtaq Control 
when he was within its range. 

"What kind of a place is Taqtaq?" I asked Ba-Karkar. 

"Not know. Never go there. Everyone say putrid." 

"It's a petroleum refinery town," Mimo said. "One of several at the edge of the Great 
Bitumen Desert. These people still make wide use of fossil hydrocarbons in their fuel and 
plastics industries. I peddled some contraband chemical equipment at Taqtaq over twenty 
years ago. The smog was cosmic-class and the auxiliary starport was very small and 
poorly equipped." 

"We'd better scope it out as we pass over," I said. "Twenty years is a long time." 

We were traversing a largely flat, arid continent with a broad underwater shelf, 
situated in a pale blue ocean ominously named the Empty Sea. It wrapped around most of 
the planet's north subtropical zone and had a decidedly odd appearance. The rocks and 
soil were ochre or vivid red, sprinkled with thousands of rounded lakes having borders of 
blue-green vegetation. Denser rings of plantlife encircled the cities, which were sited on 
larger lakes and connected to one another by networks of ruler-straight high roads and 
forested parkways. Overall, the Dagasatt landscape looked like an intricate connect-the-
dots puzzle drawn upon a long, blotchy apple peeling. 

I knew from the orientation holovids that much of the planet's rainfall sank 
immediately through the sandy soil into shallow aquifers, from which it was easily 
pumped to the surface and utilized for irrigation. Eroded mountain ranges rose along the 
northern coast of the continent, some of them snowcapped. Streams flowing from their 
forested inland slopes fed ribbons of cropfields before disappearing underground. 

We flew eastward, toward the night, at moderate velocity. From time to time Ground 
Control made contact to make sure we were still airborne. The unintelligible squeaks of 
the controller didn't sound particularly worried. Our own aerial tracking display showed 
only small numbers of conventional aircraft sharing the stratosphere with us. On Dagasatt 
it appeared that people and commodities flew mostly at low altitudes or traveled on the 
ground. 

The main forward viewer finally showed the eastern edge of the continent in the 
purpling distance. Along the coast lay what seemed to be a mosaic of hundreds of 
adjacent lakes or lagoons covering a hazy oval basin of enormous proportions. The dry 
land within the basin was very dark in color. 

"Great Bitumen Desert," Ba-Karkar informed us. 

It was vast, nearly three thousand kilometers from north to south and a thousand 
kilometers wide, surrounded on three sides by a waste of barren red sand traversed by 
highways that had oases strung along them like beads. Our ship was approaching the 
basin's western boundary, where there were six widely separated refinery cities. Smoky 
pollution trails streamed out from them, carried on the prevailing west wind. The 
opposite side of the Great Bitumen Desert was narrowly separated from the sea by a long 
arc of cloud-girt volcanic peaks called the Barrier Range. Short rivers flowed from the 
highlands into the desert basin, creating the myriad shallow bodies of water covering 
much of the natural hydrocarbon deposits. The area of bitumen was a "desert" only in the 


sense of being an uninhabitable wasteland. It wasn't arid at all. 

"Taqtaq northernmost city," Ba-Karkar said. "We decelerate now, turn over desert for 
approach." 

"Give me a closer look at the surface," I requested. 

He activated the privateer's terrain scanner and showed me how to use it. Some of the 
dry land between the iridescent, oil-slicked ponds was rough, slate-gray or pinkish in 
color. Other areas were much smoother, almost jet-black, and marked with peculiar 
concentric ringed features like huge whirlpools. Due east of Taqtaq, the desert had a 
slightly higher elevation and less water coverage. Parts of it looked almost like solidified 
lava. In the far northeastern quadrant of the basin, adjacent to the Barrier Range 
separating it from the Empty Sea, was an area where fantastically eroded red sandstone 
buttes thrust up out of a plain of pitch. Scattered plumes of smoke rose from the surface. 

The Haluk facility was supposed to be located somewhere in there. I ordered Ba-
Karkar to do a multiphase scan of the region, but none of the primitive sensors of the 
privateer found any trace of a structure or any other anomaly, and it wasn't feasible to use 
our more sensitive portable equipment inside the Qastt starship. 

"It could be shielded from overhead detection by human technology," Mimo 
suggested. "A GBD horizontal projection unit would do it. With luck, they won't have 
bothered with perpendicular dissimulation fields—only a roof to foil scans from space by 
Rampart or Zone Patrol. You'll probably be able to find the place easily enough once 
we're on the ground." 

I asked Ba-Karkar, "Is there any way to take an aerial photograph of this region—or 
do a topographic scan in hologram and make a printout?" 

Both were feasible. He showed me how to do it, and I clicked off shots of the entire 
northeastern portion of the desert, plus the adjacent mountains and seashore. The 
printouts had Qastt alphanumerics, of course, but they were a hell of a lot better than the 
chart we'd retrieved from the ship's databank. 

Then I adjusted the scanner to survey Taqtaq itself and the adjacent starport. It was 
larger than I had expected. At least sixteen spacers of various sizes sat on the ground, as 
well as numbers of conventional aircraft. I spotted something else that made me frown, 
but at that moment Ba-Karkar spoke up. 

"Asahel, now time we begin final approach and then undertake your untranslatable 
subterfuge. You understand: disaster impact simulation might become genuine disaster 
under unforeseen circumstances. Warn your people take precautions." 

There really wasn't much we could do, since the Qastt crash harnesses would only 
accommodate human nine-year-olds. But I sent Mimo aft to alert the others. 

The pirate spoke briefly to Taqtaq Starport, notifying the controller that we were on 
final approach. I was expecting a relatively sedate human-style descent pattern, but 
instead Ba-Karkar threw the privateer into a precipitous auger spin that didn't flare out 
until we were less than three hundred meters above the ground. We were inertialess, of 
course, but I still clung white-knuckled to the back of the command seat as the various 
flight-deck displays reflected the giddy maneuver. 

"Holy shit! Did you have to drop out of the sky like a goddamn rock?" 

"I great corsair captain," Ba-Karkar growled. "I drive star-ships when you mere 
embryo sleeping in untranslatable of your putrid mother. Now be silent, Asahel! I must 
drive with significant cleverness." 


He punched some controls and the engine power faltered. The ship did a wild dance 
before abruptly losing more altitude. It leveled out again at a hair-raising 125 meters 
above the asphalt, moving very slowly on a 280-degree course toward Taqtaq. I hoped we 
hadn't fallen off the starport's tracking equipment. We needed to have them find us. 

Ba-Karkar touched the com pad and said calmly, "Attention, Taqtaq Ground Control, 
this incoming starship untranslatable." 

The controller answered. 

"I now have significant emergency. Untranslatable maneuvering apparatus 
malfunction. Altitude human equivalent 124.6 meters. Engine power very erratic." 

Ground Control responded with what sounded like a query. 

"No, Taqtaq. Impossible. Power failing." 

We maintained our westerly course. The desert surface was much more rugged than it 
had appeared from upstairs. Heaped broken blocks the size of houses that looked like an 
aggregate of asphalt and red gravel formed what might have been pressure ridges. Among 
them were gleaming black mirrors, pools of some liquid that I didn't think was water. By 
now the sun was almost on the horizon, shining straight at us, and every irregularity on 
the dark ground threw a long, confusing shadow. 

More interrogatory squeaks came from Ground Control. 

"No no! I must attempt desert landing. You track my vessel? Yes?" 

A more urgent hum, chirp, chitter. 

"Descending, Taqtaq. I now proceed with emergency landing. I activate locator 
beacon and await rescue craft." The little pirate captain cut off the com. 

"Do they still have a lock on us?" I asked him. "Dammit, you weren't suppose to let 
them lose us." 

"Silence, untranslatable fool, or we all maybe die!" 

I shut my mouth and crouched on the deck, watching the navigation display. Our 
position was about six hundred kilometers east of Taqtaq, on a beeline between the city 
and the presumed location of the Haluk facility. We were almost exactly where I had 
ordered Ba-Karkar to put down—far enough from the starport so the Qastt would be 
obliged to do an aerial search-and-rescue operation at an inconvenient distance from 
base, far enough away from the Haluk facility so its guardians wouldn't be suspicious. 

The main viewer showed the ship almost skimming the dark ridge tops. We flew 
slower and slower. Ba-Karkar turned skillfully to avoid a collection of bristling scarlet 
crags and we passed out of the chaotic jumbled area into a level region cracked like a 
dried playa. A host of blobby black pinnacles had broken through the surface here and 
there like columnar mushrooms. The tallest rose at least fifteen meters high and measured 
about four meters in diameter. 

"This looks like a good landing place," I said. "We can conceal the ship among the 
outcroppings." 

"If we land here," Ba-Karkar said, "ship sink within human equivalent fourteen 
minutes. All soft bitumen under cracked surface." He pointed to a small console display. 
"Also, air have excessive noxious components from gas seepage out of cracks." 

"Oh." 

We continued to waft along at what would have been treetop level had there been any 
trees. The sun had set and daylight began to wane. The pinnacled poison plain gave way 
to a wide lake blotched with oil slicks, and on its opposite shore were more of the jagged 


black pressure ridges. Some of their fissures vented thin ribbons of vapor and were 
rimmed with a dirty yellowish crust that I suspected might be elemental sulfur. 

Then Ba-Karkar uttered a squeak of triumph. "You look!" 

Beyond the ridges lay what seemed almost like tarmac—a nearly round expanse of 
unblemished gray pavement over four kilometers wide. In the middle of it hulked a black 
excrescence that looked almost exactly like a gigantic tree stump. It had spreading 
buttress "roots" and a snaggly top. The entire formation was perhaps sixty meters high. 
The upper portions steamed gently, giving it the aspect of a charred victim of a recently 
extinguished forest fire. 

"What the hell is it?" I asked, forgetting to whisper. 

"Untranslatable. Chart say many other untranslatables like it exist this area. We land 
beside this one. Little water there but not much. Surface here very tough rind covering 
sizable reservoir of viscous pitch. Firm enough to support starship." And then he made 
my stomach lurch by adding, "I think." 

"You're not positive?" 

"Who positive?" he demanded rhetorically. "Great Bitumen Desert significant enigma 
with imperfect data. I study data, I decide where we land. We go down now... 
Untranslatable!" 

The last defiant squeal almost sounded like a battle cry, a Qastt banzai. He had 
deployed his crash harness. 

I shouted for the others to brace themselves as we headed straight for the peculiar 
black formation, came to hover in midair, and then descended as lightly as a feather into a 
steep narrow V between a pair of buttresses. It would have been a flawless touch, except 
that the skipper had miseyeballed the deeply shadowed inner angle of the notch by a 
scant half meter. Two of the six legs of the splayed landing gear scraped the walls on the 
way down. I heard a couple of loud reports and a grinding scrunch. The privateer lurched 
and shuddered. 

Ba-Karkar slapped the power kill-pad and 1.1 gravity took hold of us. We hit the 
pavement with a sublethal impact and I was flung to the deck. 

"We arrive," said the pirate captain. He retracted his crash harness and peered down 
at me. "Emergency beacon on. You want me contact Taqtaq on voice communicator?" 

"Is the ship badly damaged?" I checked my own chassis. It was operational and I 
climbed to my feet. 

"We take off easily. Land again maybe very dangerous. Starship tip over and break. 
But I think two support-legs not difficult to repair. I look and see. We now very well 
concealed from casual aerial observation, just as you command." 

"Well done!" I shook hands with myself, which is the Qastt way of indicating 
enthusiasm and a generalized slap on the back. "Do not communicate with Taqtaq 
Ground Control. Will our ship's scanner be able to detect the rescue aircraft 
approaching?" 

"When aircraft attain sufficient proximity." 

"Okay. Do you have any idea of the rescue craft's top airspeed?" 

"Maybe human equivalent three hundred kilometers per hour." 

That gave us over an hour and forty minutes, even if they scrambled instantly, which 
wasn't likely. I asked him for an atmosphere analysis and wasn't too surprised when he 
told me that the air was filthy with volatile hydrocarbons, sulfur compounds, and smog 


particulates. But it was breathable by humans—at least for a few days—and if we hadn't 
accomplished our mission by then, it wouldn't matter. 

Mimo, Zorik, and Ildiko pushed forward cautiously on the canted deck. 

"Only light damage," I reassured them. "The caper's still on track. How you guys 
doing?" 

Ildiko was super, Zorik was excellent, and Mimo told me that Ivor had survived the 
minor crash in good spirits but was very anxious to be released from the cargo bay 
because it had no latrine facilities. 

"Open both hatches," I told the Qastt skipper. "We'll all go outside for a little while. 
Ba-Karkar, while I talk to my people, you can inspect the broken landing gear. Do not 
reenter the ship without my permission." 

"I understand," he said. "You fear I commit some bad act alone in ship. No fear. I 
cooperate significantly" 

That was nice to know. But I still wasn't about to trust him. 

We trooped down the forward ramp into evening on Da-gasatt. The air was very 
warm, about thirty degrees. Its petroleum stench was occasionally alleviated by cooler 
gusts of untainted north wind that blew straight into the shadowed cut between the tall 
black buttresses. The starship rested in a pool of water no more than a couple of 
centimeters deep, which was obviously a condensate of the vapor that wreathed the upper 
part of the stump. Bits of material scraped from the root walls by the ship's glancing 
collision lay about the two broken legs of the landing gear. 

Ildiko bent down and fished a black chunk of debris out of the puddle. "Look at this. 
It's chock-full of tiny bubbles, almost like Zanderian pumice stone or even burnt toast. 
Weighs hardly anything. Do you suppose Stump Mountain is some kind of a volcano?" 

Mimo asked her for the specimen, sniffed it, and studied it briefly. "Not exactly, 
although volcanic heat probably accounts for its birth. I think this formation must be a 
carbonized mass of fossil organic material—not petroleum, but perhaps more like coal. 
The bubbles in it were probably produced by a subterranean cooking process that yielded 
carbon dioxide and steam. Since the spongy mass was much less dense than the rock 
strata and molten bitumen surrounding it, it rose slowly to the surface and cracked the 
hard crust in a starlike pattern. Then it squirted through the crevices like a thick paste and 
gradually assumed the stump shape as it cooled and hardened." 

Ildiko regarded my friend with admiration. "Are you a planetologist, Captain 
Bermudez?" 

Mimo shook his head, smiling as he extracted a cigar from a gold case. "No, querida, 
but I have visited many strange places in the galaxy during the course of my checkered 
career, and it pleases me to study their natural history. There are often evolutionary 
parallels on the different worlds because creation tends to be economical." 

Ivor came splashing over to us and the task force was complete. I told Ba-Karkar to 
carry on with his damage inspection. The rest of us moved a few dozen meters down the 
wedged-shaped black canyon onto the dry natural pavement, as firm and perfect as a 
newly laid asphalt parking lot. The rescue aircraft would find us without any trouble, and 
our ship was ideally sited for an ambush. 

The little pirate captain had certainly earned his bonus. Even the broken landing gear 
was fortuitous, adding plausibility to the crash scene. 

I began the briefing without any preamble. 


"I've been reconsidering having Ivor remain here alone guarding the Qastt prisoners 
while the rest of us hit the Haluk installation. My objections are based on a worst-case 
scenario, and I'd like your input." 

Everyone looked at me with professional blankness except poor Ivor, who probably 
thought I was about to impugn his abilities. 

"Initially, based upon information that I got from Mimo, Ba-Karkar, and the pirate 
gunner Tisqatt, I thought that Taqtaq city was a dinky little place, and we could count on 
only a single overworked search-and-rescue team to hunt for us. But during our overflight 
I took a close look at the star-port. It was larger and more modern than I'd expected, and 
there were three search-type aircraft parked there. The Qastt call the ships tuqo. They 
were unmistakable, colored blaze-orange and with wide ski-type landing gear suitable for 
soft sand or gooey bitumen." 

"Mierditas," Mimo swore. He lit his cigar with a wooden match. 

I said, "My sentiments exactly. There's no real problem if the Qastt send more than 
one aircraft on the first reconnaissance, following our beacon. We can deal with two as 
though they were one." 

"But not three," Zorik O'Toole said. 

"No," I agreed evenly. "If three tuqo come, we're out of here and the mission is an 
abort. But I think the odds of that happening are small. Okay, back to my worst case: 
What worries me is the prospect of a second or even a third search team coming out later 
if it seems that the first one pranged in and disappeared. We'll try to set up the destruction 
legend with the help of one of the prisoners, of course. And we'll camouflage the 
privateer with filotarps and turn off the emergency beacon. But there's always a chance 
that the first team will have reported our exact position to base before landing. We'll try 
to question our prisoners about this, but we may not get any good answers." I turned to 
O'Toole. "Zorik, take a translator pendant along when you hit the aircraft. If it's possible 
to question any Qastt aboard about a position report, do it." 

"Understood," he said. 

"We'll do the same with the prisoners that we take inside the privateer. But if another 
search team comes out and zeroes in, we'll know for sure that this site is fucked. The 
second team will have to be taken prisoner and the second tuqo demolished in a plausible 
fashion. After that, the privateer will have to be moved stealthily to another hiding place 
by our little buccaneer bud, to preclude a third team coming out after the second—along 
with God knows what kind of a generalized flap." 

O'Toole said, "We could neutralize that problem by moving the privateer to a new 
position immediately after securing the first tuqo and its team." 

I said, "Ba-Karkar told me that his ship can take off easily enough with broken gear, 
but landing again could be dangerous. I don't want to risk it unless it's absolutely 
necessary. Unless this site is compromised." I smiled at Ivor Jenkins. "Now, Ivor is a 
good man and I have every confidence in him. But he doesn't have the experience to 
contend with the worst-case scenario I've just described. No one, working alone, could 
cope." 

"I agree, Helly," the bodybuilder said humbly. 

Zorik and Ildiko remained impassive. They knew I wasn't about to ask that either of 
them, combat-trained veterans, remain behind. 

Mimo said, "You want me to stay with Ivor." 


"Yes. Together, you could handle just about anything." 

"Are you certain of that?" O'Toole murmured. 

I said, "Ask Mimo." 

My friend calmly puffed smoke as he stared up at the bizarre Stump Mountain. "You 
need have no doubt that Ivor and I would deal effectively with this hypothetical situation, 
Commander O'Toole." 

"There is another option," Zorik said to me. "Under these new circumstances, it's one 
that might be superior to your original plan if you've got the—if you're willing to 
consider it." 

Great. He didn't quite say that there was another option if I had the balls to make use 
of it. 

I just smiled and said, "What?" 

"Once you have a single tuqo in hand, force one of the Squeakers to call the other two 
units for backup. When they land, grab one additional ship and destroy the third. Forget 
about taking Qastt prisoners. Use 'em to propagate the destruction legend to Taqtaq 
Control, then waste 'em. Blow up the privateer. We don't need it for evac—we can call 
down Chispa's gig. This way, we have two aircraft for our raid instead of only one and a 
SWAT team of four, as originally planned. Ivor can guard the pirate and the aircraft 
while the rest of us make the ground assault." 

I said, "You know that I promised Ba-Karkar we wouldn't harm innocent Qastt. They 
don't come any more innocent than search-and-rescue personnel. I also promised him he'd 
get his ship back after the operation." 

Zorik O'Toole shrugged. "That was then, this is now. You can't see eliminating the 
Qastt, just leave 'em on the blacktop." Six hundred kilometers from nowhere. "Thanks for 
the suggestion, Zorik, but it's a no-go." "Suit yourself." 

Mimo said to me, "There is another matter to consider. If I remain here, who will fly 
the Qastt aircraft?" 

"I studied the schematics," I said. "The tuqo utilizes a primitive antigrav generator for 
lift, and a bank of small pivoting thrusters for propulsion. It's all manual, seat-of-the-
pants flying. No computers, no really vital instrumentation except the fuel gauges and 
inertial compass. I can translate them." 

Mimo grinned around his cigar. "You may actually be better off unencumbered with a 
feeble oidpedorrero like me on this raid of yours. Unless, of course, you get yourselves 
into a really hairy firefight." 

The veteran smuggler's prowess with weaponry, both portable and shipborne, verged 
on the phenomenal—which is why I'd had no serious qualms about including him on the 
team in spite of his age. 

I said, "I think I assessed the situation correctly when I assumed that this facility 
wouldn't be defended any more elaborately than the one on Cravat. It's logical that the 
Haluk and their Galapharma protectors will rely more on sophisticated intruder-detection 
equipment than defensive firepower. The worst they can expect here are Qastt snoopers, 
and from whatTisqatt said, the locals are scared stiff of the place. I'm betting that the 
facility will have a medium-splendacious perimeter alarm system with robosteered Kagi 
blasters or the equivalent, a few Mickey Mouse antiaircraft guns, and a security force that 
spends most of its time playing gin rummy." 

"You may very well be right," said Zorik O'Toole. He did a brief take. "And if it 


works out differently, why, we'll just have to improvise." 

Uneasy looks from Ildiko and Ivor. A flat stare from Mimo, who recognized the whiff 
of insubordination for what it was. From me: "If I get whacked, improvise all you like. 
Until then, I expect you to follow orders." 

"Goes without saying," said O'Toole, meeting my gaze without flinching. "You're the 
chief and we're the grunts." 

I'd been away from Zorik's type too long—not that we'd had that many hardasses like 
him in the ICS Enforcement Division, an outfit known for a certain lack of military 
formality. He was a man with no sense of humor, no inclination to accommodate human 
frailty, and no respect for a leader who failed to measure up to his draconian ideal of 
competence. I had no doubt that Zorik O'Toole would be a stone whiz in a combat 
situation. It was just too damned bad that he knew about my past history... 

"Okay." I flashed the inimitable Frost grin at one and all. "Does anyone want to 
comment on the plan revision? No? Right, let's move on to a quick review of the 
upcoming action and then get back to the ship and suit up. I'd like each of you to go over 
your part in the ambush of the Qastt rescue personnel. Be as detailed as possible. Zorik, 
why don't you start?" 

Dagasatt night. 

The temperature has dropped over twenty degrees. The sky overhead is surprisingly 
clear in spite of a foul ground haze, decorated with broken patches of Milky Way, meager 
stars, and the Haluk Cluster, which looks like a small luminescent fingerprint on black 
velvet. There are no animal or insect sounds; only a faint hissing and an occasional fairy 
tinkle from high on Stump Mountain as it steams, cools, and endures an occasional 
minuscule landslide. 

Out of the west a bright light approaches, first silhouetting the pressure ridges, then 
blazing clearly in the sky. A sound of primitive reaction thrusters. The engine noise 
changes pitch momentarily as the aircraft descends to a lower altitude, skimming the 
tarmac, vectoring in on the presumed site of the crash. A laser spot lances out toward 
Stump Mountain, discovers the slightly tilted starship nestled among the roots. An 
ominous plume of smoke rises from the wreck. Its cargo-bay hatch gapes wide open. 
There are no signs of life. 

The Qastt rescue craft lands a cautious kilometer away. It has a no-nonsense shape, 
like a squared-off loaf of human bread, and measures about ten meters in length. The 
landing gear consists of two broad skis. Projecting from the roof is a short pylon bearing 
a brilliant site-illumination lamp. The laser spot shines from a housing below the cockpit, 
which has a broad windshield through which several figures are visible. They remain in 
place as the engines throttle back to idle. A side hatch opens and a robot probe trundles 
down the ramp and speeds toward the derelict starship. 

The robot is small, equipped with a multitude of sensors. It reassures the crew of the 
rescue craft that the starship's potentially hazardous subluminal engine is turned off. 
Aside from the smoke, which is of unknown origin and may not even emanate from the 
wreckage, there are no fumes and no poisonous or flammable vapors in evidence. No 
obvious onboard conflagration registers on the infrared sensors. The robot glides through 
the shallow pool of water and ascends the derelict's ramp. It enters the cargo bay and 
begins casting about for indications of survivors. 

A figure shrouded in white robes lies beneath a tumble of blue, yellow, and red cargo 


pods. They are human-style containers, and the rescue crew judges that the crashed 
starship is one of the valiant band of Qastt corsairs that plies the void, preying upon the 
hated race of putrid boomers. 

As the robot eye zeroes in on the pathetic body trapped beneath its heap of booty, 
there is a slight movement. No clear view is possible, but the sensors confirm that the 
person is alive. 

The robot spins about, scanning for other survivors. It finds another robed shape lying 
just inside the small interior hatch that connects the cargo bay with the forward 
accommodations and the flight deck. This person lifts his head and speaks directly to the 
robot in a wavering squeal. 

"Help us." 

The voice of the rescue-team leader responds. "Help has arrived. How many people 
aboard?" 

"Six," says the crash victim. Then he falls motionless. 

A large pod blocks the robot's way and it can go no farther forward. It turns about and 
completes its scan of the cargo bay. Finding no other survivors, it exits the privateer and 
waits, oblivious to the shallow water. 

The rescue aircraft has closed its hatch. The antigrav unit lifts it a dozen centimeters 
above the smooth asphalt and the thrusters scream thinly. It glides to the mouth of the 
small black canyon, only a stone's throw from the wreck, and once again descends, 
landing at the puddle's edge. This time the engines wind down to a full stop and there is a 
moment of silence. The laser spot has been turned off but the xenon site-illumination 
lamp mounted above the aircraft casts a clear white light on the scene. 

Then the hatch reopens and four members of the rescue crew emerge, dressed in 
orange coveralls with a single ideograph written across the back, weighted down with 
gear. A single Qastt remains behind in the cockpit, bent over the flight console. 

The small rescuers enter the privateer to begin their mission of mercy, speaking softly 
among themselves. They do not notice another figure that emerges from beneath a 
camouflaging filotarp among the dark chunks of detritus and flits over to the aircraft. 

The figure is dressed in voluminous white Qastt garments. A tallish individual, it 
assumes a hesitant, slouching gait as it enters the rescue craft and moves forward. The 
pilot hears a noise, leaps up in surprise, recognizes that the newcomer is a member of the 
hated boomer race, and reaches for a weapon. She falls senseless as a dart from a stun-
gun strikes her in the chest. 

Back inside the cargo bay of the privateer, three of the rescue team are working to 
shift the containers from the half-buried victim. The plastic pods are surprisingly light. In 
fact, they appear to be empty. Meanwhile the fourth rescuer, who is a medic, squats to 
assess the injuries of the Qastt victim lying near the interior hatch. 

The unconscious man rolls over, pulls a species of exotic pistol from beneath his 
robes and rams its muzzle into the neck of the flabbergasted medic. 

"Silence! No movement or I shoot!" 

The other three members of the team pause in their efforts, paralyzed by shock. 
Before they can react, a hideous xenoid rises from among the pods, shedding the robe 
that had concealed his monstrous size. He also holds a weapon, which he fires with 
lightning speed—zzztl zzzt! zzztl The rescuers crumple helplessly to the deck. "Why?" 
cries the Qastt with the gun in his throat. "Why?" 


I slipped the Ivanov back into its holster and pushed out of the rumbled pile of empty 
pods. Mimo and Ildiko shoved aside the container that had blocked the inner hatch and 
came out of the forward compartment into the cargo bay. 

"Nice job, Ba-Karkar," I said. 

Ildiko seized the arms of the medic while Mimo relieved our Qastt accomplice of his 
uncharged Kagi pistol. Deftly, the former Zone Patrol officer manacled her captive's 
wrists, then clipped a translator pendant to his blaze-orange coverall. His angry chitters 
were decoded into a string of "untranslatables." 

"Tell him the situation, Ba-Karkar," Ildiko commanded. 

The pirate captain addressed his indignant compatriot. "You human prisoner. I human 
prisoner also, compelled to cooperate. Rest in holy silence. They not harm me. They not 
harm you either if you obey orders. You not obey, they shoot you like others." 

"You kill agents of mercy!" the prisoner shrilled in my direction. "Untranslatable 
epithet boomer you!" 

"They aren't dead," I said. "Only sleeping for a while." 

I told Ildiko to take him outside. Ba-Karkar and I followed on her heels. Mimo was 
already snapping restraints on the wrists and ankles of the three unconscious Qastt. 
Hurrying down the ramp, we met Ivor, who had been concealed under a filotarp deeper 
inside the canyon. 

"Shall I begin the unloading, Helly?" he asked. 

I nodded. "Bring everything to the Qastt aircraft as fast as you can." 

He opened the forward hatch and began hauling out the weapons and equipment we 
had previously unpacked from the pods. 

Ildiko frog-marched the little medic to the tuqo while I followed with Ba-Karkar. The 
dazzling site lamp had been turned off and Zorik was coming down the ramp of the 
rescue craft with a Qastt body flung over his shoulder. He was no longer wearing his robe 
disguise. 

"Had to take it down when it reached for a weapon," he remarked. "It didn't seem to 
be using the com. Probably waiting for a situation report from the others before calling 
into base." 

"We'll check it out," I said. "Dump the snoozer with Mimo and then give Ivor a hand 
transferring gear. And kill that locator beacon inside the starship." 

"Affirmatory," said Zorik O'Toole. 

Ildiko and I let Ba-Karkar precede us into the cockpit of the rescue aircraft. He 
fumbled about the console for a few moments. "Asahel, their communicator not in 
operation." 

"Turn it on and see if anyone at Taqtaq is trying to talk to these people." I said to the 
captive: "Listen to me. The lives of your comrades depend on what you do within the 
next few minutes. If you obey me, none of you will be harmed. We will keep you 
prisoner for a short time and then let you go. Ba-Karkar, confirm this." 

"He mean what he say. He putrid boomer but he not lie. What honorable name you 
have?" 

"Gogatar," muttered the medic. "I qualified healer." 

"Okay, Gogatar," I said. "This is what I want you to say to Taqtaq Ground Control." 

I told him, and he performed the expected song and dance of defiance, whereupon 
Ba-Karkar, Ildiko, and I worked on him with both threats and reassurances. He 


capitulated in a shorter time than I would have expected. We sat him on the pilot's bench, 
still shackled. 

"I'll control the transmitter," I said. "Speak the first phrase over and over. You won't 
know when the words are being broadcast, so it won't do you any good to attempt to 
speak a warning. Ready?" 

Gogatar hung his small head. His emerald antenna-brushes had wilted into doleful 
dishmops. In a monotonous chirr he intoned: "Taqtaq Control, you hear me? Taqtaq 
Control, you hear me?" 

I keyed him in, then listened for a response. It came immediately, and Ba-Karkar 
translated it: "We hear. Speak." 

I forced the medic to say in halting phrases that his colleagues were dead and he was 
the only survivor. The searchers had found the crashed starship on a strange, cracked 
bitumen formation. They landed, and four of them reconnoitered and entered the starship 
in the usual manner. No sooner had they gone inside than the asphalt crust around the 
vessel began to heave and fracture. A cataclysmic eruption of tar surged up. The slab 
holding the starship tilted and the ship was engulfed. 

A cacophony of horrified squeaking from base greeted this ghastly tale, but I didn't 
bother to have Ba-Karkar translate. Following my lead, Gogatar told the controller that 
the slab on which his own aircraft rested was also sinking slowly into the bitumen 
morass. There was no possibility of escape. 

"Now tell them goodbye," I commanded. 

He started up from his seat. "Nooooo!" 

I cut him off in mid-scream. "That was very good. Even the last bit. Do him, Ildy." 

The small dart took him between the shoulders and she caught him as he fell. 

"Not necessary!" Ba-Karkar protested. 

"Expedient," I said. "All the prisoners will awake at about the same time tomorrow 
morning." 

Ildiko hoisted the medic with ease and took him away in a fireman's carry. 

The pirate shot me a glance of bitter resentment. "You plan render me unconscious, 
too, for sake of putrid expediency?" He was probably having second thoughts about 
cooperation after seeing his compatriots mowed down. 

I asked him, "How long will it take you to repair the landing gear on your starship?" 

He seemed caught by surprise. "Two human equivalent days. Maybe significantly less 
time if boomer-mountain help me. I have all parts." 

"Do the job and don't make trouble. Then you won't be rendered unconscious or put 
into shackles. I'm going to take this aircraft and go fetch my enemies who are hiding with 
the Haluk. Two of my people will go with me, and two— including the boomer-
mountain—will stay to guard you and the other Qastt." 

"Eeeeee. What if you die far away, Asahel? What happen to us then?" 

"Then you and the others will be in a shitload of trouble, so you better pray to your 
Qastt gods that I have nothing but good luck. Does that translate?" 

"Significantly," said Ba-Karkar. 

I slipped into the bench seat before the alien control console. There was more room 
for my boomer physique than there had been in the privateer's flight deck. I wouldn't 
have to fly the tuqo with my knees tucked under my chin, provided that I sat just a wee 
bit sideways. 


Ba-Karkar watched me uneasily as I pulled an e-book out of my pocket and began to 
compare the aircraft instrumentation with diagrams flashed consecutively on the book's 
small monitor. 

"You fly Qastt tuqo before—yes, Asahel?" 

"No. But I'm a fast learner." 

"Eeeee! Crazy boomer you!" 

"Probably," I agreed, sighing. "You feel like giving me some flight instruction?" 

"I think it better I go back to my starship and pray." 

 

 

Chapter 8 

 

His gods must have been listening. 

After performing a complete external and internal inspection of the tuqo, I did a 
thirty-minute checkout flight at minimum altitude, skipping over the tarmac like a stone 
and dodging among the pressure ridges, getting the feel of the craft's controls and 
fuselage clearance. The bus wasn't hard to fly once my mind sorted out the fact that 
antigrav and propulsion weren't linked, the way they were in a human-designed 
hoppercraft. It was moderately tricky keeping a suitably delicate grip on the child-sized 
double joysticks and avoiding a ham-fisted boomer tendency to overcontrol. 

When I was satisfied, I returned to the crash site and told Zorik to jury-rig the 
external units of our specialized scanning and stealth devices on the outside of the tuqo. 
Back on Seriphos, when the Rampart ExSec Equipment Manager had asked what we 
wanted to take along, I'd described Dagasatt's terrain without identifying the planet and 
told him to give us whatever he thought might be useful for a small-force assault. He'd 
assembled half a ton of costly gear, which we'd picked over and marveled at while 
Chispa was en route. Some of the stuff we had was so cutting-edge that we never could 
figure out what it was for. If Operation Q tanked, it wouldn't be for lack of top-line 
equipment. 

Inside the privateer, I found the cargo bay had been converted into a makeshift brig 
by Ildiko and Mimo. Clamshell pods lined with bubblewrap padding had been made into 
beds for the unconscious agents of mercy, who were already tidily sacked out. Other 
empty containers of varying sizes made an improvised table, seats, and even a toilet 
cubicle for their use. 

Ildiko and Ba-Karkar had been stowing away packets of Qastt food, containers of 
water, and other spartan necessities for the prisoners. The two of them finished as I made 
my inspection, and Ildiko sent the exhausted, grumbling little pirate to his cabin to take a 
breather. 

"What next?" she asked me. 

"Why don't you give Zorik and Ivor a hand. And see if you can find a way to mount 
guns on the outside of the tuqo." 

"I have my doubts," she said, "but I'll do my best." 

Mimo was stacking unneeded and empty pods outside the starship to give the five 
Qastt captives as much room as possible. "I don't anticipate any difficulty with them," he 
remarked. "After all, they're rescue technicians, not soldiers. If everything goes well, we 
can allow them outside for exercise. They might even help Ba-Karkar with the repairs. 


Just the sight of Ivor will probably frighten any notion of misbehavior out of their heads." 

"Wait till daylight before contacting Joe with the laser-corn," I said. "The smog will 
thicken as the night goes on, and the laser's UV will make the particulates fluoresce. The 
beam could be visible to passing aircraft if somebody's looking sharp. I'll get our team's 
relay set up as soon as I can tomorrow." 

"How long do you plan to be gone?" Mimo asked. 

"Give us three days. Seventy-two hours. We'll try to keep in contact via LC relay, but 
there may be blackouts, depending on the terrain. If we don't get back to you at the end of 
the three days, you can assume we've bought it. Hit the trail as fast as you can." 

"Helly, don't be so pessimistic. I agree that the privateer should leave the system if 
you're delayed, but there's no reason why Chispa shouldn't stay. She'll be in no real 
danger unless the opposition calls in heavy reinforcements. Even then ..." He smiled 
craftily, knowing full well that the Y700 could fly rings around any starship in the 
cosmos. 

I flipped a hand, conceding the point. "All right. You and Joe lurk out there in your 
overgunned blitzboat until hell freezes over if you feel like it. But remember that Ba-
Karkar's unauthorized departure is certain to alert Dagasatt Ground Control, and they 
might pass the news along to the bad guys. We don't know what kind of liaison the Haluk 
facility has with the locals. Or with Galapharma." 

"We'll cope. Don't worry." 

"Got to. It's my job." I tapped my friend on the shoulder. "Well, I'm out of here. I'll 
send Ivor back when he's finished with the loading. You two can deploy the camouflage 
filotarps and then kick back with a bunch of beers. Be sure to give old Ba-Karkar a major 
snort of exotic booze, too. He's okay. Take care of yourself, Meem." 

"Vaya con dios, Helly." 

I left him standing on the ramp, thoughtfully chewing on an unlit Montecristo No. 2. 

The distance between our crash site and the presumed position of the Haluk facility 
among the high redstone buttes was roughly 380 kilometers. I hoped we could get within 
striking range and find a good hiding place before dawn, thirteen hours away, since our 
wave-bender would not be able to conceal us from observers using powered optics. A 
more efficient vehicular stealth system required more power than the tuqo could supply; 
and even our small bender, being a species of force-field, sucked juice like a black hole. I 
was gambling that the Haluk installation wouldn't have very-long-range perimeter sensor 
arrays, and that their optical lookouts would only be stationed near the building 
compound itself, or possibly atop the adjacent buttes. 

Our tuqo was equipped with a simple radar navigation system that would have 
pinpointed us to the foe like a bug on a bedsheet: useless. So I was obliged to utilize my 
own skull-mounted wetware, augmented by a rather decent photon-amplifying system in 
the bus's windshield that I'd been happy to discover during my study of the specs. 
Without it, a night approach by starlight would have required me to wear power optics all 
the way, leaving me with poached eyeballs. 

 

The aerial photos and the holographic terrain maps made during our overflight in the 
privateer were invaluable guides. Even so, we had some narrow escapes early on when I 
misjudged our airspeed and had close encounters with deceptive bits of the local 
geography. As the night progressed, my tuqo piloting improved. Zorik and Ildiko had 


sense enough not to backseat-drive, but I could tell that the ex-commander was sorely 
tempted. 

Our carry-on detection equipment included a powerful wide-angle light amplifier 
scope, as well as a scanning system that would warn us of the more conventional types of 
intruder alerts such as PHBA. Luckily for us, the really high-tech sensing defenses had 
blatant signatures that would have been easily spotted from space, so they weren't an 
option for a clandestine installation such as this one. I figured that the worst thing we 
might encounter was a platterstack EUV-laser micropulse array; but if I flew no higher 
than ten or twelve meters, even that would never tag us. 

Zorik and Ildiko took turns operating our detection gizmos and sleeping, while I 
drove on and on and on, listening to old-time country music on a portable stereo—Willie 
and Waylon and Kenny and Garth, Reba and Patsy and Barbara and the Austin Lounge 
Lizards, singing about a simpler world long ago, where the heartaches and the 
frustrations and the laughs bore a curious correspondence to those of the twenty-third 
century. 

The nightscope didn't reveal a single living thing abroad on the bitumen, nor were 
aircraft of any sort flying overhead— which was to be expected since the only other Qastt 
settlements in this remote region of the continent were situated far to the north. Eastward, 
in our direction of travel, lay only a wilderness of petroleum deposits, the narrow Barrier 
Range of volcanoes, the eponymous Empty Sea, and a hidden Haluk facility that might or 
might not harbor Oliver Schneider. 

I tried not to think about the very real possibility that Operation Q was only a 
dangerous wild goose chase. Or that the facility would be so secure that our small force 
wouldn't have a prayer of penetrating. 

The smog finally blew away, improving visibility. We zoomed along like a 
hovercraft, close to the surface of the ground—making good time over the lakes and flats, 
wafting more cautiously among the pinnacles, ridges, untranslatable stump mountains, 
and rugged areas. Our average speed was only 45 kph, about as fast as a four-wheeler 
moving on a rocky dirt track in the Arizona backcountry, but we were keeping well 
within our designated time frame. 

We ran into the first array of ground-based automated PHBA motion sensors when 
we were 120.3 kilometers from our hypothetical destination. Ildiko shut off the scan 
alarm and I brought the tuqo to a jolting midair halt, then retreated until we were out of 
range. 

"It's okay," she said. "We barely touched the signal underbelly before backpedaling 
below its horizon." 

I mentally gave thanks that I had been forced to slow down to a relative crawl by a 
thicket of the black mushroomlike outcroppings. A few minutes earlier we'd been 
bombing along over a lake at 200 kph. 

Zorik had been awakened by the scan alarm and came forward. "Think they made us, 
Chief?" 

I'd told him to call me Helly at least half a dozen times. He still hadn't loosened up 
enough to do it. 

I said, "No. We were still in the ground clutter zone." 

"Here's a fascinating thing," Ildiko pointed to the monitor, which was in replay mode. 
"The six units of the phased array within range are precisely three klicks apart. And they 


seem to form a perfect arc of a circle." 

I blinked. For an installation that was supposed to be hidden, the implication was 
ridiculous. "A circle? Galapharma engineers must have supervised the sensor setup. They 
wouldn't be that stupid." 

Ildiko had a marvelous silvery laugh. "Why not? The ground-based dissimulator 
hides the facility from space observers. Landside, all they have to worry about are naive 
little Squeak snoopers and the odd human smuggler flitting around. The horizon break 
fits the numbers pretty well, given the rough terrain. I'll bet you a tenner cash money that 
this array encircles the target precisely one hundred klicks out!" 

"Compute it," I said. 

A few minutes later she marked the holo printout of the area with a stylus and drew a 
bull's-eye around it. "Your Haluk facility has got to be right there. Small fuzzed-out open 
area surrounded by high rock formations that poke through the dissim umbrella." 

"The dumb galoots!" I chortled. "They might as well have hung out a Kick Me sign." 

Zorik smiled minimally. "Methodical to a fault." 

Now we wouldn't have to waste valuable time just searching for the target inside the 
area shielded by the GBD. I was happy as a burro eating prickly pears. 

"Okay, Ildiko. You get your winnings when we're back aboard Chispa. Now analyze 
that coverage and figure what we need to ooze through it." 

She had the answer within a few minutes. Zorik fed the data into our wave-bender 
generator, which he had mounted on the aircraft's site-lamp pylon, and the tuqo continued 
stealthily on, now invisible to automated high-band sentinels. We passed within spitting 
distance of one of them, and I had Zorik shoot a holo of it amidst the xeno landscape. The 
unit was camouflaged from overhead observation by a wave-permeable fake-rock 
umbrella, while the sides of the hide were wide open. We could even see the Sheltok AC 
logo on the antenna housing. 

We found identical perimeter-defense rings at twenty-kilometer intervals the rest of 
the way in. Their coverage overlapped and a bat couldn't have overflown the area without 
being detected. There were no EUV-laser platterstacks or other gonzo sensor systems. 
The two innermost phased array installations had automated Kagi guns as well as motion 
sensors. 

We crept past the blaster emplacements while holding our collective breath, but the 
bender did its job flawlessly and the tuqo got through scot-free. However, I was afraid 
that our good luck wouldn't last much longer. Sooner or later we were bound to run into 
sensors that the bender couldn't foil. Or guards with eyes. I was gambling that it wouldn't 
happen before we were within striking distance of our target. Ground-assault striking 
distance, that is. It had proved impossible to mount weapons on the outside of the tuqo, 
and the only option left to us was penetration on foot. 

The aircraft now moved among huge sandstone buttes, some of them over a thousand 
meters high and eroded into spectacular turreted or perforated shapes, like the formations 
of Monument Valley in the ancient Navajo lands of the American Southwest. They thrust 
up from a dead-level, faintly wrinkled black surface that looked suspiciously like an 
immense pool of molten tar capped by a thin dry skin. Here and there were smaller 
versions of the smooth concentric formations we'd seen from the approaching privateer. 
We speculated that these might be fresh upwellings or even the remains of "popped" 
bubbles of petroleum distillates. Stranger yet were the huge bones that protruded from 


some of the ebony flats, remains of monsters engulfed ages ago and now upthrust again 
by the churning bitumen. In a few places the bones were so abundant that they looked 
like some alien Elephants' Graveyard. 

The air had become calm with the approach of dawn. Rags of mist hung motionless 
among the formations like tired phantoms. The eastern sky was turning gray, and 
landscape features had become clearly visible through the aircraft's un-amplified side 
windows. 

Zorik was doing a final sweep of the rock tops with the big nightscope, which would 
shortly become useless as natural illumination intensified, searching for observation posts 
or spy-beam antenna towers. Ildiko continued to study her scanner intently, giving 
regular verbal reports as I had requested. 

"Clear at nineteen klicks. No change in the phased-array freq. No laser beacons or 
gravitation scans." 

We were very near and we needed solid ground now, a place to conceal the tuqo 
while we did our final reconnaissance afoot. I wanted to get as close to the target as 
possible, so I threaded a slow course among the buttes, doing my best to keep solid rock 
between us and the facility. We were now well within line-of-sight range from the top of 
formations that surrounded the place. If a photon or graviton beam swept us, we were 
dead meat. 

But there were no beams, and Zorik found no rocktop structures. 

"Clear at seventeen klicks," Ildiko said. 

She had her own copy of the topo plot. Once, when I began to skirt a small butte 
clockwise, she said, "Go right, Helly. Better cover." She was correct and I was wrong, 
and I cursed silently and had to concede that after a stressful all-night drive, my judgment 
was slipping. Tension and fatigue made me ache all over, and my eyes were strained 
from the constant focus-shift back and forth between the windshield and the printout I 
was using as a map. 

I called out, "Zorik, secure the nightscope and break out the powered day-glasses. 
Then come forward and help me navigate. I'm whipped." 

"Right." He sounded almost pleased. 

I didn't care. 

Ildiko said, "Clear at fifteen klicks." And then, "Clear at fourteen. Approaching 
margin of dissimulator field. It's not a very strong one: a permeable smudger, maybe a 
GBD-2H, only about forty meters high." 

More and more rock formations thrust up from the bitumen. As we moved beneath 
the dissimulator field, the higher portions of the outcroppings and crags assumed a faintly 
distorted aspect, but there was none of the "sparkle" effect typical of stronger force-fields. 

"Clear at twelve klicks," Ildiko said. 

"Zorik, call out the nature of the surface as it changes. I've gotta concentrate on 
dodging these damned rocks." 

"Affirm. Surface is mixed petroleum and gravel." 

The eastern sky had pinkened. Qastt have more sensitive vision than humans, and 
when external visibility reached a "bright dusk" level, I knew that the windshield light-
amplifier system would automatically shut down. Then my tired eyes would be on their 
own. 

Zorik said, "Rock needle dead ahead." 


"Got it." I steered around the deceptive formation with a meter to spare. 

Ildiko said, "Clear at ten klicks. Passing between Kagi-armed antenna units identical 
to those at the Twenty Perimeter. But now they're only half a klick apart." 

"Surface is sand, gravel, and tar," Zorik said. "Is it wise to go much closer?" 

"Just keep on trucking," I said through my teeth. 

"Clear at nine klicks," said Ildiko. 

"Surface is broken petroleum aggregate. Through-route to the left ahead." 

"Got it." The windshield light-amp shut off just as I flew through a confusing cluster 
of red-rock towers, cursing under my breath. 

We knew that the target was on a level plain hemmed about with high rock 
formations. However, the GBD projector that roofed the place had subtly distorted the 
near-surface features on our map, especially those within a four-kilometer radius of 
ground zero, leaving us ignorant of the immediate target surroundings. It was possible 
that Galapharma and the Haluk had built their mystery facility on pontoons floating in the 
bitumen; but I fervently hoped that they'd chosen the easier option of solid ground. We 
had no easy way of traveling on foot over a treacherous morass of tar. 

Ildiko said, "Still clear at eight klicks." 

"Level surface is stiff petroleum," said Zorik. "Better slow it way down. Shitty terrain 
ahead." 

"Right." 

The contour-flying tuqo now resembled a small boat creeping through increasingly 
narrow straits that separated lofty barren islands. In some areas the closely crowded rocks 
made it impossible to skim the bitumen and I had no choice but to hopscotch to altitudes 
of fifteen meters or more. Our blaze-orange aircraft might have been invisible to sensor 
waves, but an intelligent observer could have spotted it with ease. 

"Clear at seven klicks." 

"Level surface is gravel, some shallow water over petroleum." 

Then I saw what I had been hoping to find. And brought the tuqo to an abrupt hover-
stop just above the tarry shore of a small lake. 

"Yes!" I hissed in satisfaction. "Look—that squatty conical butte dead ahead of us 
across the water? It's an ancient volcano with a talus-slope collar. We've got a jillion of 
'em in Arizona. First one I've seen here. I betcha there's good firm rocky stuff all around 
it. Check it out with the day-glasses, Zorik." 

The dark-colored eminence was about three kilometers in diameter and half as high, 
mostly a heap of shattered basalt. Only a stub of solid rock poked out the top, the remnant 
of a vent plug. To the north were two lesser sister formations of igneous rock. According 
to the map, they seemed to be separated from Conical Butte by a precipitate narrow 
canyon. A stream running through it probably supplied the lake we were hovering beside. 
To the south loomed a colossal red sandstone outcropping. The corridor between Big Red 
and Conical Butte was wider than the northern canyon through the Sisters. The map 
showed a dense cluster of tall crags at South Corridor's far end... 

Beyond which lay the flat with the secret Haluk installation. 

"This is it, troops ... Ildy, scan the tops of all these buttes with the whole spectrum. 
Zorik, scope 'em out as well as you can with the glasses. If this outfit is really security 
conscious, they'll have spy-beams up there. The GBD field isn't strong enough to 
seriously inhibit coverage." 


But there was nothing. 

I flew across the lake and zipped around the foot of Conical Butte counterclockwise, 
keeping the bulk of the degraded volcano between us and the facility. Viscous bitumen 
beneath the water gave way to asphalt aggregate and then to a rough stony surface with 
only a few traces of petroleum. At Kilometer 4.2 we reached the crags, which seemed to 
be a fragmented lava dike extending out from the tumbled talus slope of Conical Butte. 
Three spindly columns of black smoke arose from the crags' far side. 

It was nearly full daylight. 

I eased the tuqo into a deep niche with a rocky floor, touched down, and killed the 
engine. All three of us scrambled out and covered the aircraft with filotarps, which 
instantly assumed the colors of the surrounding shadowed rock. Northwest of us Conical 
Butte was rosy gray in the light of the rising sun. Above our heads to the south, the sunlit 
crown of the monster sandstone formation I'd dubbed Big Red appeared to be painted in 
fresh blood. An even bigger red-rock mountain to the east, which would later be named 
Jukebox Butte by Zorik O'Toole, glowed fiery around the edges. The cool air was foul, 
not only with the usual hydrocarbon odor but also with the acrid smell of oily smoke. 

"Surely the Haluk wouldn't use these bitumen deposits for fuel as the Qastt do," 
Ildiko said. "They have efficient small fusion generators and matter converters." 

"Maybe our friends across the way accidentally ignited a seep of crude oil or some 
volatile stuff," I said. "Or there might be a live volcanic vent that did the same thing. If 
petroleum products are smoldering underground in the rock fissures, they might be 
impossible to extinguish." 

Ildiko made a face. "Let's get back inside the ship where we can breathe clean air." 

We retreated and I put her back to work on the scanner. "All-band surveillance for at 
least another hour, with special emphasis on the com frequencies. We want to be sure no 
bad guys come cantering through the crags with guns blazing." 

"One of us should do a fast long-range ground recon as well," Zorik stated. "I 
volunteer. I'll do an optical peek around those pointy-top rocks just north of here. Move 
less than a klick away from the ship. Scope out the Three Smokes and make sure there's 
no unusual volcanic activity. Might even be able to view the target if the terrain's 
favorable. What say?" 

Oh, you spring-butt bastard. Just can't wait to get into action. .. 

"Good thinking, Zorik. Gear up. I'll do the comlink right away so you can keep in 
touch with us here through your helmet LC." 

He went aft to prepare his equipment. Ildiko resumed her station at the scanner and 1 
fiddled and diddled with the CL-4 until its thread-thin modulated laser beam found 
Chispa Dos in her geosynchronous orbit half a million kilometers above the Great 
Bitumen Desert. 

Joe Betancourt reported that Ogu, Tisqatt, and Tu-Prak were very subdued and 
compliant. Three Qastt vessels had lifted off from the planet's central starport yesterday 
afternoon and left the solar system. The only human starships on the move were obvious 
Rampart vessels coming and going from Cravat, thirty-three light-years away. There was 
no trace of Haluk starship activity within a sixty-light-year radius of the Dagasatt solar 
system. Mimo and Ivor had just reported a quiet night aboard the privateer with no sign 
of additional search-and-rescue aircraft from Taqtaq. 

I thanked Joe, gave a brief report of my own, then had him activate the relay system 


that turned Chispa into a very expensive private communications satellite. As I signed off 
I heard the back hatch of the tuqo close softly, but 1 thought nothing of it. 

My mind was already on breakfast and I dug out the pod containing our selection of 
ready-to-eat meals. "Carnivore or veggie?" I asked Ildiko. "Coffee, tea, or juice?" 

"Veggie, please. English Breakfast tea with two honeys, apple juice if you have it." 

" Yo, Zorik!" I called. "You want to feed?" 

No answer. I figured he'd gone outside for a dump. It was impossible for a human to 
sit down inside the incommodious Qastt amenity at the rear of the tuqo. 

I started pinching hot and cold bags, loading food onto little degradable dish-trays. 
One order of walnut oatmeal, grilled soy bacon, hot apple-raisin compote, and beverages; 
one order of ham-mushroom omelette, mini-bagels and cream cheese, cherry-pineapple-
blueberry yogurt, and black coffee. There was no activity on the scanner except signals 
from commercial and government stations in the refinery towns, scratchy solar wind, the 
enormously long waves of distant lightning, and a fluctuating IR emanation from the 
burning site beyond the crags. 

"You're from Earth, aren't you, Ildy," I remarked after stuffing my face. 

"Yes. How can you tell?" 

"Elementary, my dear Szabo! I used to be a cop. Actually, it's the slight accent you 
give to your Standard English that betrays you. Colonials homogenize their speech within 
a generation and talk media-vanilla. Only people born on the Old World retain regional 
accents. I can't place yours." 

"It's Hungarian. My mother and father have a hydroponics farm in a small town north 
of Budapest. They grow roses and freesia for the floral trade. I helped them from the time 
I was small." Her face took on a rather wistful expression. "They were marvelous parents, 
but I thought they were very bourgeois and boring. I couldn't wait to join Zone Patrol and 
take a posting as far away from Earth as possible. I wanted adventure and excitement 
among the stars." 

"Did you find it?" 

"Oh, yes. It was a good twenty-five years." 

"But you opted for early retirement. Why?" 

A mischievous flicker in her eyes. "Not for the reason O'Toole did! My girlfriend 
Cosa was invalided out. Bilateral arm replacement. I decided to go, too. Stand by her 
during rehab. She and I retired to Seriphos. We thought it would be amusing to grow 
flowers as my parents did, and it was great fun... until Cosa met someone else. Poof!" She 
shrugged. 

"And why did Zorik leave the patrol?" 

"Perhaps I shouldn't have mentioned it. He hung it up a year before I did. There's 
nothing on his record but gold stars, not the least hint of slime. But some of the ZP 
insiders said that Commander Iron Nuts was given a clear choice by the brass: retire or 
get flushed. It was never clear exactly what happened. There were rumors of some gross 
piece of insubordination. O'Toole never was one to suffer fools gladly— even if they 
outranked him." 

Ildiko fell silent, studying the monitor of her instrument with particular intensity. 
Eventually she shook her head. "Nothing transmitting out there. Just the usual, and the 
Three Smokes glowing beyond the pointed crags." 

We ate without speaking for a time. Zorik still hadn't joined us. I began to describe 


my former life as a happy beach bum and charterboat skipper and told a few yarns that 
made her laugh. Then I got down to what was public knowledge concerning my 
devastated career in the ICS Enforcement Division, figuring she had as much right to 
know as O'Toole did. 

She listened with sympathy. When I finished, she asked, "Do you think you were 
framed by some criminal type with a grudge?" 

"No. Almost certainly by Galapharma AC. As a deliberate opening move in its 
corporate chess game with Rampart. It was a nifty piece of irony. I'd joined the 
Interstellar Commerce Secretariat in the first place to defy my father and thumb my nose 
at the family Starcorp. I was a flaming idealist when I was young. Ready to expose the 
heart of darkness in the Hundred Concerns and all the other corporate predators who 
think they own the galaxy. Pretty sappy, huh?" 

"No," she contradicted me softly. "They think they're above the law, that the 
Commonwealth Assembly is a collection of puppets and they pull the strings. The big 
Concerns have even corrupted the patrol—some wings of it, at any rate." 

"How do you know?" I'd heard the same rumors, of course. Not only about the patrol, 
but about the ICS as well. 

"That was the reason I requested a transfer out of Zone 16. You must know about the 
dirty business involving Carnelian AC and the Joru years ago. Well, it never really 
stopped— just became more discreet. Among other things, the Carnies have been literally 
getting away with murder, liquidating uncooperative xeno gashrunners with the collusion 
of a patrol death squad. The involved officers have never been charged, but the rest of us 
all knew what was going on." 

"Have you ever heard talk of ZP corruption out here in the Spur?" 

"There were hints of payoffs by Galapharma. For unauthorized variations in patrol 
patterns, mostly. The grapevine had it that Gala was spying on Rampart as part of its 
acquisition strategy and didn't want its speedboats logged in certain areas." 

"Near which worlds?" 

"Mostly around Seriphos, Plusia-Prime, and Tyrins. The high-traffic Rampart planets. 
But also way out near the Tip where there are hardly any human colonies at all. That was 
hard to figure." Her blue eyes suddenly widened. "Would it have had something to do 
with the Halukt" 

I stared at her for a moment without speaking. The rear hatch of the tuqo slammed. 

Hurriedly, I said, "Ildy, what do you intend to do when this mission is over?" 

She seemed flustered. "Well.. . if you're satisfied with my work, 1 hoped you might 
keep me on. Let me do prisoner-escort duty. Help take the perps back to Earth. I'd like to 
see my folks. Check out the family greenhouse." Her mouth twisted wryly. "Who knows 
what I might do if the right position comes along?" 

"You're hired," I whispered. "But it'll be our secret, for now." 

"Is that coffee I smell?" O'Toole sang out. 

"You want some?" 

"Damn right! Make it big, make it black, make it extra hot, and make it snappy." He 
barked out a laugh to let me know he was only perpetrating a little comradely whimsy, 
then called, "Anything on the scan, Lieutenant?" 

"Nothing at all, Zorik." Ildiko winked at me. She wasn't falling for his rank-pulling 
bullshit. "It doesn't look as though the opposition expected anyone to get through the 


perimeter defenses." 

"One jumbo Java, coming up," I said. 

When I took it back to him a few minutes later, he was already dressed in full battle 
gear, except for the helmet. He poured the coffee into an insulated flexcanteen and said, 
"I've decided on a tentative reconnaissance route. Want to see?" 

I refrained from giving the question the response it deserved. "Sure." 

He laid out a completely new topographic plot. 

It had to have been made within the last few minutes, using our own portable photon-
differential terrain mapper. 

He caught my look of shocked surprise and incipient anger and smirked. "Not to 
worry, Chief. I drew it with a single pulse at the very instant the sun peeked over the 
mountains. Even if the hostiles noticed, they'd think the burst was a solar flare phenom. 
Just part of the dawn chorus. I used the same trick during a successful clandestine action 
on Bandusia." 

"Zorik—" 

"Check it out!" He was very proud of himself. He'd displayed creative initiative while 
I'd been playing short-order cook. "This copy's for you. I have another one in my pack. 
With the photons bouncing off this collection of buttes, I was lucky enough to get some 
really useful detail." 

The single-shot holographic "shoot-around-corners" computer-enhanced image was 
necessarily imperfect, with no fine resolution of the topo features or true differentiation 
between tar and hardpan on the ground surfaces; but it was a hell of a lot better map than 
the one we'd made with the Qastt equipment. It clearly showed rocks as small as 
watermelons. It penetrated all but the final kilometer or so of the circular GBD field. 
There was even a fuzzy ghost image of the shielded Haluk facility itself, a central module 
with three equidistant projecting wings like stubby propellor blades. East of the structure 
was a very shallow expanse of water, and beyond that rose another monstrous sandstone 
formation with steep sides that he'd christened Jukebox Butte. 

I said, "I wish you'd consulted with me before making this map." 

"You'd have agreed, right?" 

"Probably, but—" 

"I remembered the solar-flash stunt in the last minutes before the sun popped up. 
There was no time for discussion." He continued, as though that were the end of it—and I 
suppose it was, "Now then, since we have this new map, there doesn't seem to be any 
really compelling reason why I shouldn't do a full target recon right away. I'm feeling 
great. Got plenty of z's riding in. I estimate the round-trip would take five or six hours, 
max. Continuous feedback to base, of course. With the recce done, I'll still have plenty of 
time to rest up for our strike after nightfall. What say?" 

"Explain in detail what you're proposing." 

"First, I considered and rejected the idea of climbing Conical Butte and doing the 
recce from up there. Even though there's plenty of cover, I believe that the target's GBD 
umbrella would interfere with high-angle powered optical observations. We've no choice 
but to check out this target at ground level." He gave me a severe look. "After evaluating 
the adjacent terrain on the new map—a goddamn hedge of high rock surrounds the 
place—I'm provisionally accepting your assumption that there'll be no perpendicular 
dissimulator field hindering our direct observation of the building itself. Under the 


circumstances, the defenders wouldn't be concerned about low-angle spying from a 
distance." 

"Go on." 

"I'll make an approach this way, always keeping solid rock between me and the 
target, until I reach this point." 

His finger traced a tortuous eastward-trending path among the volcanic crags and 
redstone outcroppings, well to the south of the area from which the Three Smokes 
emanated, until he turned north across a nearly level region and came to a narrow 
sandstone pinnacle over 140 meters tall. The facility lay only about fifteen hundred 
meters beyond it. 

The pinnacle had a lot of broken rock at its base and was oddly twisted in its upper 
reaches, bearing a passing resemblance to a huge corkscrew. Relative to the target, it was 
the closest bit of useful cover to be had, and looked like the best place to launch a 
penetration. 

O'Toole certainly thought so. "This is the most appropriate assault route. The new 
map indicates that the area between Corkscrew Pinnacle and the target structure is dry 
ground." 

"Seems to indicate," I corrected him. 

He waved that aside. "I'll confirm it optically, of course. No other potential line of 
attack looks nearly as promising. 

East of the target is water: an impossible approach. The open area due west of the 
target, between it and the rough talus at the base of Conical Butte, is nearly three 
thousand meters across and has almost no cover, only a few widely scattered boulders 
that are less than man-sized. The region southwest of the target, in the direction of the 
crags where we're hiding now, probably has burning oil pools—my deduction from those 
three smoke plumes." 

"The smokes concern me," I said. "The recon path you've chosen precludes any 
exploration of their source." 

"Irrelevant, unless the primary assault route choice proves impracticable—in which 
case, we'll have to consider an approach from the north or the southwest. Time enough to 
check out the smokes then, if necessary." 

"With all its twists and turns," I said, "this route of yours covers at least five 
kilometers one way. That's a considerable distance for a lone scout in a potentially 
hazardous alien environment." 

"I don't see any real problems for an experienced man utilizing camo gear. Do you?" 

"Not according to this map." 

"Then do I have your permission to proceed?" 

He was gung-ho and ready to ramble, and I couldn't think of any good reasons to hold 
him back—except the possibility of unexpected terrain hazards, and my resentment at the 
way he'd challenged my authority. To be fair, I tried putting myself in O'Toole's place. 
He wanted the mission to succeed so he could retire in style, but he was saddled with a 
leader who was a disgraced cop turned cowboy adventurer, clearly lacking in recent 
combat experience. He knew exactly what he was doing and suspected that I didn't. 

Maybe Iron Nuts was entitled to a little attitude. 

"Okay," I said. "Permission granted. You'll make a continuous holovid record of the 
recon, of course, blink-transmitting the compressed data back to us via the lasercom 


relay. I also want a verbal report from you every fifteen minutes. Sooner if you make an 
important find." 

"Affirmatory. If there's a way to penetrate that target, I'll find it. Guaranteed." 

He gave me a hard smile before clapping on his helmet. It enclosed his entire head 
and featured a multifunction power-optic visor, holovid camera with continuous map-
revise data stream, laser communication capability, and an omnifilter respirator. Like his 
soft-armored combat jumpsuit, it had an environmental system to keep him comfy. His 
belt held a Kagi sidearm, a monster commando knife in place of the usual Ivanov stunner, 
small flexcanteens of water, coffee, and nutrigoo, and a bulb of trailblazer spray. He 
strapped on an open-frame instant-access backpack loaded with fifteen kilos of fighting 
equipment and survival gear. Its scabbard mounts held a Talavera-Gerardi 333 actinic 
blaster with auto targeting, and a compact LGF-18 30-mm grenade launcher that carried 
standard and magnum HE, flare, and the newly developed AG97 sleepy-gas rounds. 

Armed to the teeth, tough as the calluses on a barfly's elbow, ready for anything, 
Commander Zorik O'Toole, CHW Zone Patrol SWAT (Ret.), opened the rear hatch of the 
tuqo and marched out into the Dagasatt morning without a wave or a backward glance. 

I stared after him in wordless bemusement, knowing he'd make good on his 
"guarantee" if any man could. Also knowing there was no way I'd ever want him 
guarding my back. 

Never rely on a man who won't call you by your name. 

Ildiko and I agreed on three-hour watches. I crashed first, laying out a pad and 
sleeping bag in the aisle of the tuqo, the only place on the cramped aircraft where I could 
stretch out full-length. My sleep was dreamless and so profound that when the pillow 
buzzer woke me I found I'd hardly shifted position. 

I went forward. Ildiko showed me the plot of O'Toole's progress on the computer's 
greatly revised map, which continuously incorporated topographic data sent in by his 
camera. The monitor showed him approaching the tall sandstone formation called 
Corkscrew Pinnacle. Gaps between the incremental dots representing his quarter-hour 
call-ins were getting closer and closer together. 

"He's moving more slowly than I would have expected," I remarked. 

"The surface has gone tricky." She passed me the e-book with details of his verbal 
reports. 

I skimmed it. During the first couple of hours, he'd moved at a brisk pace among the 
crags on a winding easterly path, traversing firm ground that was mostly broken volcanic 
rock or level red sand and gravel. But as his route curved northward toward the 
Corkscrew, he encountered a floorlike expanse of deeply fissured igneous rock that he 
speculated might represent an old lava flow. Some of the crevices showed glints of oily 
liquid in their depths. 

Zorik's last message had reported that areas of the fractured surface now had a 
cindery crust, as though the oozing petrochemical material had burned at some time in 
the past. 

He noted that tiny wisps of vapor were rising from some patches of cinders. 

I cursed. "He's over two and a half kilometers east of the Three Smokes. But it's 
beginning to look as though a similar region exists around the pinnacle approach. We 
could be facing serious shit if it's extensive." 

"His next report is due in four minutes." 


I did a quick check of her scanner log. The Haluk facility seemed to be under a total 
electromagnetic blackout. 

Again I found myself speculating whether Schneider was still there, exiled to this 
godforsaken place until Galaphar-ma's takeover of Rampart made it safe for him and his 
co-conspirators to resurface in the Perseus Spur and assume remunerative employment 
under the new regime. The notion of a life-preserving "insurance policy" was logical. But 
why hadn't Alistair Drummond simply commanded his minions to hook Schneider up to 
the psychoprobe machines until he disgorged any incriminating data? 

Maybe they had. And maybe the reaming attempt had backfired. Knowing where the 
hot poop was buried and being in a position to dig it up and neutralize it didn't necessarily 
equate. Cunning old Ollie could have come out of the interrogation with his policy and 
his skin intact. 

And very, very pissed off... 

"O'Toole to base," said the lasercom. 

"Copy," Ildiko replied. "Go ahead, Zorik." 

"Position approx one-forty-five meters due south of Corkscrew Pinnacle eastern 
extremity. Attempting approach to vantage point, but I'm hampered by increasing areas 
of highly unusual terrain. Old volcanic crust has disappeared now and surface is mostly 
sand and red gravel with patches of black cinders. Some of the cinders are smoking. We 
have no gas vents, craters, or large plumes—-just a kind of diffused fuming in the hot 
spots, like from a raked-over campfire. Incidental comment: these cinders don't resemble 
the substance comprising Stump Mountain. And the gassy emanations seem to be real 
smoke, not steam like the Stump gave off." 

Ildiko said, "Copy that. Have you taken surface temperature readings?" 

"Affirm. Every dozen or so meters since last report. Variable temps up to a max of 
62.8 degrees on current leg of the trail. We definitely have increasing thermal activity in 
the region. We need that new portable subterrain scanner to figure what's under the 
ground here." 

But he'd left it behind in the tuqo. The device weighed nearly eight kilos, and Zorik 
had probably figured he wouldn't need it since he didn't plan to explore near the Three 
Smokes. 

I leaned toward the mike. "Helly here. Does the zone of smoking cinders extend all 
the way up to the base of Corkscrew?" 

"Conditional negatory. It seems intermittent. Sometimes windblown sand makes it 
tough to spot the borders of the high-temp material. Not all of the really hot stuff smokes, 
either. Proceeding with care and marking the trail with frequent spritzes of Lublaze." 

"I'm concerned about this situation," I said to him. "If patches of subterrain 
combustion extend north of Corkscrew-between the pinnacle and the Haluk facility—
we'll have to ditch the approach." 

"I don't think the hostiles would build their installation on a firepit," Zorik remarked 
sarcastically. 

"No," I said. "But they sure might have used them as natural perimeter defenses." 

That shut him up. 

Ildiko said, "Zorik, do you have ETA for vantage point at base of pinnacle?" 

He gave the estimate in Zebra Time—ten minutes from now. "But I'll want to do a 
preliminary survey before reporting. I'll get back to you on the regular sked, Lieutenant 


Szabo. O'Tooleout." 

"Base out," said Ildiko. She looked at me over her shoulder. "What do you think?" 

I shook my head. "He picked the south approach because it's the best available, and 
he really wants to make it work. But there's an old country song about playing poker that 
we sing where I come from. The refrain goes: 'You gotta know when to hold 'em, know 
when to fold 'em.'" 

She nodded and sang softly. " 'Know when to walk away and know when to run.' We 
sang it in Hungary, too." 

I gave her upper arm a gentle punch. "My turn at the monitor. Time for you to sack 
out. Three hours of sleep. By the time you wake up, old Iron Nuts will be on his way 
back." 

But he wasn't. 

Zorik's camera stopped relaying terrain data eleven minutes later. He didn't respond to 
my call and missed the next fifteen-minute sked as well. I checked the relay equipment, 
even queried Joe Betancourt directly. He confirmed what I already knew: the carrier 
beam from Zorik was out. 

"You want me to try finding him with enhanced optical, Helly? We're at extreme 
range, but—" 

"No. He's too far under the GBD umbrella by now. We'll have to risk a dissim-
penetration scan from Chispa, extrapolating from his last known position. Use a 
minimum diameter punch-through." 

"Copy. Stand by." 

Minutes passed. Then Joe came back. "Negative for a human body at the LKP. But 
there is something. Here comes the image." 

The holovid map on my monitor acquired new detail in the immediate vicinity of 
Corkscrew Pinnacle. I pulled in an extreme close-up and studied it, feeling my spine go 
icy. 

It was a new column of smoke. 

"Thanks, Joe. I'll take it from here. Out." 

Had Zorik met with an accident—or did his abrupt disappearance signify something 
else altogether? 

Unlike Ivor Jenkins, whose father was an old chum of Mimo's, and the Library 
irregulars, who had been recruited by Karl from his circle of over-the-hill ex-security 
personnel, the three newest members of my team were virtually unknown factors. Matt 
Gregoire's computer had vouched for their professional skills but very little else. 

Of the three, O'Toole had always been the most problematical. I'd felt an instant 
empathy for quiet Joe Betancourt and competent, amiable Ildiko Szabo. With Zorik, it 
was just the opposite. And he'd been forced into retirement for some unspecified 
transgression. 

Ildy had spoken of corruption in the Perseus Spur arm of the patrol. Belatedly, I 
wondered if Zorik O'Toole had been part of it, paid off by Galapharma to look the other 
way while Concern starships secretly prowled Rampart space, sabotaging Starcorp 
operations and doing God knew what else. 

I'd offered Zorik a whopping fee for his services. 

What if Gala had topped it? 

I woke Ildiko and we both began to suit up in full combat gear. 


 

 

Chapter 9 

 

We were about 250 meters south of Corkscrew Pinnacle, emerging from a dense 
group of volcanic crags, when we caught our first clear glimpse of the new smoke plume 
rising straight up into the dead calm morning air. Its source was very close to the base of 
the twisted sandstone formation, concealed among large broken rocks at the far right-
hand side. 

Our excursion had so far been rapid and uneventful. I hadn't shared my fear that we 
might no longer be safe in the tuqo, nor my doubts about the loyalty of Zorik O'Toole. If 
Commander Iron Nuts had sold us out, Ildiko didn't need to know about it yet. 

"That's the new smoke Joe spotted from orbit," I said. "Right about at Zorik's last 
known position." 

"A lot smaller than the three plumes farther west," she murmured into her helmet 
mike. "Almost like a burning pile of rubbish or something." 

I said, "Yeah." 

Or something. 

We hunkered down together behind a desk-sized fragment of black basalt. Our filo 
ponchos turned us into part of the scenery. The entire base of Corkscrew was hidden from 
our view, nor could we see anything beyond it because of other intervening formations. 

Earlier, I had spoken about the very real possibility that O'Toole might have 
accidentally broken through the cinder crust and plunged into a fiery crevasse. Now 
Ildiko proposed a more hopeful scenario. 

"Maybe he came under attack. I know you said Joe couldn't find any live-body 
signatures, but how about this: a Haluk sniper hits O'Toole's packframe or one of his 
weapons with a glancing beam. The EM pulse fries his com equipment instantly. Maybe 
wounds him pretty bad. He takes cover, launches an HE grenade. Whammo! Exit the 
hostile sniper down a furnace hole that opens up. O'Toole dives deep into the rockpile out 
of sensor range and starts regrouping." 

"Mmm." I was noncommittal, but it was a possibility. 

Over two hours had passed since Zorik's scheduled transmission. We'd raced out from 
the tuqo as fast as we could, following coded polarized trailblazes that were only visible 
through our powered visors. I half expected Haluk fliers or Galapharma hoppercraft to 
appear overhead at any moment, but the sky remained empty. 

So had the sublight communications spectrum on the portable scanner Ildiko carried. 

An enemy force alerted and on the hunt would not be able to use a stealthy laser relay 
system to keep in contact, as we did. Hoppers or goons on the ground would probably 
communicate via ordinary radio because the Qastt planet had no com satellites. I doubted 
that they'd bother keeping radio silence during a search-and-destroy mission—ergo, 
nobody was out looking for us yet. And it seemed fairly certain to me that no ambush had 
taken down Zorik, either, or the sniper would have reported the incident to base. 

Gently, I pointed the latter out to Ildiko. "Besides that, if O'Toole had been struck by 
a hostile shot, we'd have picked up a last squawk as his LC unit went out. There was 
nothing. But if he dropped through the cinder crust, the relay beam would have clipped 
off silently. Just as though he'd moved into a dead zone, out of sight-line ofChispa." 


"But isn't there a chance he might have survived if he did go down? I mean . .. maybe 
it wasn't burning all that much where he fell in." 

"Anything's possible. We're sure going to check out the smoke site and finish the 
reconnaissance." 

And decide whether or not two people had a ghost of a chance of breaking into the 
Haluk facility. 

 

Know when to hold 'em, know when to fold 'em. 

I said, "We'll have to move along now. Sooner or later somebody in the installation 
will send a hopper to check out the new smoke." 

Ildiko nodded silently. Her grotesquely helmeted head flashed in and out of view as 
the filo units in the poncho hood did their best to render her invisible. 

"I'll take the point," I said. "I'm going to hoover along with the new subterrain scanner 
from here on in—make sure we don't end up in Crispy Critterville ourselves. I have to 
learn how to use this thing, so I'll go pretty slow to start with. You hang back about ten 
meters and watch for moving targets. Sweep the northern heights and the sky behind the 
pinnacle with your Tala-G scope. If you spot anything, give a shout. We both freeze 
under our ponchos. The hostiles won't find us unless they land smack-dab on our heads." 

"Check." 

Unshipping the STS wand and holding it just above the ground, I called up its device 
display on the left side of my visor and cut a test slice. The image revealed an 
underground cross section only two meters wide but fifty meters deep and about half that 
in length. The rock strata were neatly labeled in terminology that might have been 
crystal-clear to a geologist but was a trifle abstruse to the likes of me. I was able to rotate 
the slice freely with verbal commands and even magnify portions for close inspection. 
When you moved the wand from side to side, a lingering afterimage gave a wider section. 
Pretty neat. 

"How's it look?" Ildiko asked. 

"We got a layer cake. The frosting is a very thin skin of old lava, cracked all to hell 
and covered with sand in some places. Below that are broken-up sandstone strata shot 
through with intrusions of different kinds of igneous stuff, mostly basalt and andesite. 
The sandstone has little pockets of what the scanner calls 'complex liquid and volatile 
hydrocarbon compounds.' " 

"Crude oil." 

"Yep. What I was afraid of, Ildy. Let's go." 

We set off in a northeasterly direction toward Corkscrew, crossing an open area 
nearly free of protruding red formations. The surface was largely fissured dark rock with 
scattered drifts of scarlet sand and gravel. In some places the oil seeps were clearly 
visible, soaking the sand or down inside the cracks. The petroleum reservoirs in the 
subterranean layers got larger as we approached the pinnacle, and scorched areas 
appeared on the surface where oil had burned once upon a time. 

We came upon the first patches of cinders. The scanner called them "petroleum 
combustion residue and fused mafic mineral granules." They were associated with 
underground pockets of identical cold, slaglike stuff, each linked to the surface by a kind 
of clogged vent or natural chimney. As we moved north my visor display showed cinders 
mingled crazily with broken red rock beneath the volcanic crust in a manner entirely 


mystifying to my layman's eye. 

Then my scanner indicated that we'd reached the first of the hot spots. I stopped 
suddenly in the middle of the flatland, forgetting how vulnerable Ildy and I were to 
enemy observation. A light wind had begun to blow, flapping our ponchos and 
compromising invisibility. Corkscrew towered ahead, 144 meters of eroded red and ochre 
sandstone, partially veiled by torn black smoke. 

I told my helmet computer to expand the subterrain display over my entire visor, 
providing a stereoscopic vision of what lay beneath my feet. With the scanning wand in 
my extended right hand, I rotated slowly where I stood. 

The Dagasatt of air and sunlight disappeared and I saw its amazing underworld in 
three dimensions. It almost seemed as though I were back in the caverns of Cravat, 
turning as I surveyed stygian galleries, corridors, and grottos. There were miniature 
natural catacombs beneath the surface of this part of Dagasatt, too—not carved by 
groundwater but born of some bizarre combustion activity. The rock underfoot was 
honeycombed with holes. Most of them were very small, but others were as large as 
rooms, fantastic in shape, interconnected with their neighbors by an intricate web of 
narrow channels and an occasional chimney leading to the surface. 

Almost all of the chambers were partially full of granular cinders. In some the filling 
was dead black and cold. Others had hearts that glowed a fitful deep carmine, like banked 
furnaces. A very few, lying directly ahead of me and linked together with vermilion 
veins, were pockets or seams of red-hot living coals, burning oil-soaked mineral matter 
sandwiched between layers of rock. Cracks supplied the fires with oxygen from the upper 
world and also let the smoke escape. 

Ildiko's shout echoed in my helmet. "Aircraft! Aircraft!" 

I dived flat, pulling my limbs beneath the camouflaging poncho, shutting down the 
scanner, collapsing its sensitive wand. The surreal technovision of hell vanished. 
Welcome to a new and different kind! 

"How many?" I asked. "Can you identify type?" 

"One hopper, sixty meters above the deck. Popped out from behind the pinnacle. It 
sure as hell looked human. Maybe a Vorlon ESC-10." 

"That'd fit if Galapharma agents are supervising and guarding the Haluk facility, the 
way they did on Cravat." 

We lay motionless. The humming sound of the engine changed pitch but got only 
slightly louder, as though the aircraft was slowly circling the area near the pinnacle. 
Finally it landed and we dared to peek out from under our concealing ponchos. 

The hopper was about seven hundred meters northeast of our position, partially 
concealed by the heaps of fallen rock that lay around Corkscrew. It was human-made, 
almost certainly a Vorlon, painted black, with no alphanumerics or other identifying 
marks. At full magnification my visor showed at least four moving figures but no decent 
detail. 

"Ildy, can you bring yourTala-G scope to bear on them?" 

"Doing it. Wait one .. . Oh, my. We got four homo saps in simple Class One 
envirogear, sidearms only. One guy with some sort of scientific apparatus that might be a 
portable ST scanner, another with unknown gadget, two kibitzers. My gunscope calls the 
aircraft ESC-10XA. It's the armored model, carries one Harvey HA-5 cannon, two Kagi 
BRB-200 blasters." 


"Anything on the EM scan?" 

"Wait... Affirm on that. Tuning. Dammit, the transmissions are encrypted and our 
descrambler can't hack it. Most likely they're just reporting the touch to base. Gone quiet 
now." 

"It's okay. Keep watching. They look excited?" 

"Not a bit. The scientific pair are passing out of sight among the rocks. Others 
hanging back, don't seem eager to get close to the smoke until the area is guaranteed safe. 
Apparently no attempt being made to search the area systematically. Now all subjects ex-
visible." 

About twenty minutes passed before the masked and hooded human figures 
reappeared, emerging from among the rocks in single file. They stood by the aircraft for a 
short time, conferring. Then everybody piled inside and the Vorlon flew away. 

"You're certain there were only four of them walking around?" I asked. 

"Positive. You were thinking they might have found O'Toole's body? It sure didn't 
look like they were carrying anything except small equipment." 

"Never mind. Let's get on with it." 

We climbed to our feet. I couldn't see her face, of course, but she seemed to be 
studying me. "Not a body . . . You were afraid O'Toole was alive and called the hostiles 
to pick him up. You thought he'd finked on us somehow." 

I didn't reply. 

"Doesn't compute, Helly. Why would he have waited this long to make a move?" 

"So the Galapharma goon squad could grease us and the people in the privateer 
without endangering him. But it looks like I misjudged poor old Zorik after all. He was an 
asshole, but not a double-crossing asshole." I shifted into a more comfortable position 
and pulled out my coffee canteen. "Let's wait here five more minutes to be sure the 
hopper doesn't circle back, then get on with the recon." 

We covered the final distance quickly. Zorik's trailblazes followed a circuitous path, 
avoiding the hot cinder patches. In a couple of spots my subterrain scan showed 
dangerously fragile crust above the smoldering firepits. 

The red boulders heaped around the pinnacle were chunks of sandstone that had 
weathered off the larger formation and crashed to the ground. We clambered up on them 
as Zorik must have done and made our way east, toward the source of the smoke. I had to 
put away the scanner temporarily, needing both hands to climb. 

The area immediately around the columnar base of Corkscrew opened, forming a flat-
surfaced corridor strewn with drifted sand and small stones. I was tempted to jump down 
and travel where the footing was easier, but there were no boot prints in the sand, 
indicating that Zorik had kept to the partial cover of the rocks. So we did, too. 

Damned good thing. 

We found the smoke just short of the vantage point—the place where it was possible 
to see beyond the pinnacle into the region where the Haluk facility lay. Just below our 
position on the boulders was a broad expanse of windblown sand. A jagged hole about 
two meters wide, stained with a great splash of soot around the edges, had been punched 
into the surface right next to the rocks. Roiling black smoke rose from the opening and a 
red-orange glow pulsed obscurely in its depths. 

There were no footprints near the hole. Zorik had obviously hopped down off a 
boulder onto what had looked to him like firm sandy ground. 


And plummeted into fire. 

"Aw, shit," Ildy whispered. "I wasn't any big fan of O'Toole's. But to go like that. . ." 

I pulled out my STS unit and swept the area, describing what I saw on my display to 
Ildy. An infernal chasm underlay almost the entire flat tract of sand, which concealed a 
volcanic-rock crust that was less than four centimeters thick in some places. The 
underground chamber was as long as two soccer fields and equally deep, containing a 
mixture of incandescent petroleum and mineral matter. It extended from our rock pile to 
the great sandstone block that formed the underpinning of Corkscrew, and wrapped 
around the formation's far side. 

"Let me take your Tala-G while you set up the thermal body-scanner right here," I 
said to Ildiko. "This little nook in the boulders gives pretty good cover for a survey of the 
facility." 

Too bad Zorik had decided to get closer. 

Creeping into the natural redoubt, 1 propped up the heavy blaster and brought the 
scoop-shaped eyepiece to my visor. There it was at last, a building standing on a small 
open plain surrounded on all sides by soaring rock formations. The shallow lake on the 
right side of it had begun to gleam as the sun rose above the bulk of Jukebox Butte. 

The place had only a single story but was fairly large. A domed roof over the central 
module held a tall tower supporting the GBD projector and a collection of com antennas. 
Only two of the three radial wings of the structure were clearly visible to us. Their roofs 
were flat, and at the outer edge of each was an efficient-looking blaster turret. The 
windows in the facility were small and there weren't very many of them. The only door I 
could see was situated in the angle between the wings. 

The facility's hopper pad was a simple slab just west of the building. As I watched, a 
ring of caution lights surrounding it flashed and the aircraft parked upon it sank down on 
an elevator platform and disappeared. A sliding lid sealed the opening in the ground. 
There were no fences or external guard installations, but a ring of small sensor housings 
armed with antipersonnel Kagis encircled the place about a hundred meters out, just 
beyond the hopper pad. 

A distinctly tough nut for two people to crack. 

Sprouting at the back of my mind was the seed of an idea. 

If it worked, then Zorik O'Toole's awful death might not have been useless after all. 

"The sniffer indicates lots of warm bods inside there," Ildiko remarked. She had the 
hypersensitive thermal scanner set up in a little collapsible tylar tent that would shield it 
from the firepit's radiation. I came over to have a look at the monitor. She said, "We have 
excellent cross-sectional views of the east and west wings, but I'm afraid I have no idea 
how to interpret the data. Those regularly spaced indistinct blips are certainly ranks of 
individuals. Hundreds of them! But they're not moving, and I can't believe they'd be 
asleep in an upright position. And see—other people are walking among the lines of 
stationary ones. Most of the mobiles appear to be Haluk, but there are a few humans there 
as well. More humans and Haluk are moving about in the central part of the building. 
Total enemy complement—wow!—four hundred and seventy. What the hell are they all 
doing here?" 

"I think I know what this facility is," I said. "It fits a theory I had about this place." I 
sat down on the rock beside her. "Keep an eye out for any indication that the hopper's 
coming up again. We'll hang out here for a little bit while I brief you on what 


Galapharma and the Haluk were doing on the planet Cravat. Then you and me are gonna 
start some serious trouble." 

I figured they'd land the hopper fairly close to the place it had set down earlier, so we 
threw together a little stone fort in a convenient rock pile near there and crawled inside. 
Both of us carried LGF-18s. Since I was the leader, I had dibs on shooting off the 
fireworks. 

After I programmed their timers, I launched three magnum HE grenades, one after the 
other. They plopped onto the sand that roofed the combustion chamber and exploded 
simultaneously in a multilobed fireball. The concussion stunned us for a moment. A 
cloud of sand containing bits of rock blasted over our tiny shelter. 

When the dust cleared, we saw flames leaping half as high as Corkscrew Pinnacle out 
of three new holes. The fire subsided after a few minutes and columns of smoke much 
larger than the one marking Zorik's pyre billowed into the air, all but curtaining the 
twisted red-rock formation. 

We waited, knowing that observation instruments inside the facility would be trained 
on the novelty. But would the hopper return? 

"I don't think they're going to fall for it," Ildy said after twenty minutes had gone by 
with no sign of an enemy excursion. 

"Give 'em time. They have to do a little arguing. The scientists have had their innings. 
Maybe this time a load of tourists will come. It's got to be stone boring duty, guarding 
four hundred dystasis tanks full of Haluk genetic engineering subjects." 

"I don't understand why Galapharma built the facility here instead of on a Haluk 
planet," she said. "Even if Dagasatt was more convenient to the source of the genen 
vector they were stealing from Cravat, there's the huge expense and inconvenience of this 
remote site, and the need to maintain security against the Qastt." 

"My guess is that the decision was political. The Haluk leadership might have wanted 
to keep the project secret from their general population—at least for the time being, when 
so few of their people are able to undergo the new treatment. Otherwise, there might be 
some serious unrest on the part of the have-nots." 

"You think that only the Haluk elite are being freed from the allomorphic cycle?" 

"It's likely, since their supply of PD32:C2 is still very limited. As I understand it, no 
other genetic engineering vector will work, and the stuff's not easily synthesized. The 
only reliable vector source the Haluk have at the present time is Galapharma. Except for 
the rip-offoperation on Cravat, Gala agents have have been obliged to buy PD32:C2 from 
Rampart on the open market, then resell it at an exorbitant markup to the Haluk. Gala was 
also responsible for setting up the dystasis facilities and training Haluk personnel in the 
techniques developed by Dr. Emily Konigsberg. Emily's dead now. She used to be the 
lover of Alistair Drummond, the Galapharma CEO. The Haluk genen scheme was her 
idea. Ultimately, it spawned the whole illegal trade conspiracy." 

"It's hard to understand why you think the genen project is so wrong," Ildiko said. "I 
mean, it's reprehensible of Galapharma to try to destroy Rampart in order to control the 
vector supply, and to engage in profiteering at the xenos' expense. But why shouldn't 
Rampart itself help the Haluk escape from this ghastly allomorphic thing? It could sell the 
genen vector to them at a reasonable price—" 

"Ildy, there's more at stake here than correcting a highly inefficient alien physiology." 

I hadn't told her about the demiclone threat. The advent of nonallomorphic Haluk was 


bad enough. In their gracile phase, Haluk are highly intelligent, perhaps even smarter 
than humans. They spend about one-third of their day sleeping and are active the rest of 
the time, just as we are. But they also exist for nearly half of every four-hundred-day year 
in a state of tightly cocooned suspended animation, and endure an intermediate 
lepidodermoid phase that turns them into lumbering feebs for another couple of months 
before they enter their shells. 

I reminded Ildy about that. "Haluk allomorphism is the reason why their civilization 
has been so slow to progress, even though their race is much older than humanity and far 
more numerous." 

"You're afraid that if Haluk acquire a human-type life cycle, they'll compete with us?" 

"I think they'll wage war on us, babe. Their planets are vastly overcrowded, even with 
half the population zonked out at any given time. Think what'11 happen when the Big 
Sleep is eradicated. Part of their devil's deal with Galapharma is an agreement that will 
turn over more than a thousand Rampart-mandate T-l and T-2 worlds to the aliens for 
colonization once Gala owns the Perseus Spur. But the Haluk won't stop at that." 

"How can you be so negative about them?" she demanded. "Heaven knows they're a 
contentious lot, and they seem to hate and fear humanity. But if Galapharma can work 
out a trade agreement with the Haluk, then why can't—" 

"There's more. Besides the genen equipment, Gala is also selling them other high 
technology stuff. Brokering starships, computers, energy generators, all kinds of 
advanced hardware produced by colluding Big Seven Concerns. The shortsighted idiots 
think they're only helping the Haluk improve their quality of life. So far, the Concerns 
haven't traded weaponry or large quantities of important materiel—just enough to keep 
the alien payoff flowing. Do you know that the Haluk star-cluster is exceptionally rich in 
rare transac-tinide elements? That's all Alistair Drummond and his greedy cronies care 
about." 

"So you're afraid that the reengineered Haluk will someday be able to build advanced 
starships and weapons of their own, and the balance of political power in the Milky Way 
will be upset." 

I gave a little mirthless croak of laughter. "Ildy, even the allomorphic Haluk are smart 
enough to copy our starship and energy technology right now! I've got personal evidence 
that they've already done it on a small scale. But there's worse dirty work afoot. The 
PD32:C2 process can do more than eliminate the allomorphic cycle in a Haluk. It can 
change a Haluk into a human . . . and vice versa. The process is called demicloning." 

She uttered an astonished phrase in another language I presumed was Hungarian. 
"But how is that possible?" 

"Emily Konigsberg used human DNA to eradicate the allomorphic trait. That gives an 
altered Haluk entree into our racial genome and makes demicloning feasible. The process 
itself is complex. I certainly don't understand it, except to know that it works." 

"But why in God's name did the woman do such a thing?" 

"She explained it to me once, not long before she died. An idealistic dream about 
improving human-Haluk relations through a temporary exchange of physiology. What it 
came down to was that Emily was a naive simp and the Haluk pulled the wool over her 
eyes. By the time she began to suspect that her xeno buddies weren't as committed to 
inter-species brotherhood as they claimed to be, it was too late. The Haluk had made the 
demicloning thing an immutable part of their deal with Galapharma." 


"I can't believe that Gala didn't understand the potential danger!" 

"They thought they had a handle on it. Konigsberg inserted a redundant DNA 
sequence—a kind of marker—into all of her Haluk-human transforms. Other than that, 
it's virtually impossible to tell a demiclone from a genuine human except by its actions. 
We presume Gala knows how to identify the ringers. We don't. Not yet, anyhow. We will 
know as soon as we compare a known demiclone's genome with that of a genuine 
human." 

"These demiclones would make perfect spies—" 

"Or thieves, once they sopped up enough of our culture to pass muster. We know of 
at least one perfect Haluk-human. It was a duplicate of Dr. Emily herself, and it might 
have been on its way to Earth when it was accidentally killed. I can't believe that 
Galapharma's agents knew that Fake Emily existed. The Haluk are playing a secret game 
of their own with at least some of the demiclones, and the Commonwealth of Human 
Worlds is the unsuspecting opposition." 

"Have you alerted CHW to—oh, Christ! Look! A hopper's coming up on the facility's 
pad lift." 

"Right. Get ready. Keep monitoring the com bands." 

I scuttled out of the rocky redoubt and took up a position among some boulders a 
dozen meters farther north. If the hopper touched down in the same place as before, we'd 
have it flanked. 

In a few minutes the black aircraft was hanging over our heads, doing a look-see for 
the sightseers aboard. 

Come down! I begged them telepathically. You can't savor the real experience unless 
you smell the oily smoke through your inefficient respirators, and feel the heat, and 
imagine what it would be like to plunge feet first into flaming death. .. 

 

Finally it landed, farther east than I would have liked but almost out of sight of the 
facility. Good enough. 

When its hatch opened, five humans emerged, clad in the simplest class of 
envirogear. Two of them wore Kagi pistols. Their leader carried a subterrain scanner and 
the others crowded around to study the monitor's depiction of the fire down below. When 
that thrill palled the crew began tramping through the boulder field to obtain a closer 
view of the smoke holes. 

"Any com traffic?" I asked Ildiko. 

"Negative." 

"Wait for my shout." 

I made certain that nobody remained behind in the aircraft. When the tourists had 
Corkscrew's solid rock between them and the Haluk facility, I said, "Hit 'em, Ildy." 

Each of us launched a sleepy-gas grenade. They soared in a very low trajectory and 
exploded, phut phut. The targets were wearing Class One breathers fit only for filtering 
smoke, dust, and microbes. The AG97 went right through them. The hopper crew 
staggered, turned around and made a desperate attempt to retreat. One of the armed men 
nearly managed to make it back to the aircraft, collapsing as he attempted to pull a 
communication unit from his belt. 

Ildiko and I were up and running as the last one went down, sheathing our launchers, 
drawing our Ivanov sidearms in case of opposition. But all of the enemy were snoozing. 


"Let's haul 'em aboard," I said. 

We dragged the nearest body into the aircraft. It was damned heavy. The Vorlon was 
without passenger seats, the roomy compartment behind its cockpit open to accommodate 
freight or the bulky gear of combat personnel. I spotted an antigrav tote clamped to a side 
bulkhead and let out a yip of appreciation. 

"Now we're in business! I'll use this cart to gather up the rest of the baggage, and you 
climb into the pilot seat and make sure the base isn't trying to raise us on the com. If they 
do, simulate a gronk-out." 

"Affirm." 

I retrieved the other four hostiles, slammed the hatch, stripped off their masks, and set 
off a gas-neutralizer cartridge. All of the captives were human males. While I disarmed 
and restrained them, Ildiko lit the hopper's engine and turned on the environmental 
system. A few minutes later we were able to pull off our helmets and lose our heavy 
packs and other combat gear. We lounged side by side in reversed command seats, 
slurping hot coffee and nutrigoo from our canteens and surveying our inert quarry laid 
neatly side by side on the deck. Given the neutralizer, they'd wake up within ten minutes 
or so. Without it, they'd be gorked for half a day or more. 

"Nice going, Lieutenant, ma'am," I said. 

"My pleasure, Chief Superintendent, sir. I suppose it's too much to hope that one of 
these birds might be the coveted Ollie." 

"Sorry. We're not that lucky. Could be we nabbed some of the small-fry fugitives, 
though. I'll check 'em out in a few minutes. I really need this caffeine." 

She got up with a smile. "Well, what I need is to visit a decent-sized ladies' room." 
She went aft. 

I glanced idly about the ulterior of the Vorlon. God, it was great to be in a ship 
designed for humans again! This one was a beaut, armed and armored and equipped with 
an oversized powerplant. I wondered how many more 1 OXAs were stashed in the 
facility's underground hangar. Outside, the sun shone brightly on the bloodred wall of 
Corkscrew. The smoke was diminishing. 

A muffled groan came from one of the figures lying on the deck. I rose and went over 
to them, pulling the little e-book from my jumpsuit pocket. It contained mug shots and 
dossiers of Oliver Schneider and the four ExSec officers who had fled with him from 
Seriphos. Except for Ollie himself, I didn't know any of them by sight. 

I began comparing faces. Nobody matched. 

"Rats," I muttered. 

Ildiko reappeared. "No joy?" 

"Not in this bunch. It looks like we'll have to break into the facility after all. There 
must be a tunnel connecting it to the underground hangar." 

One of the men opened his eyes and mumbled something incomprehensible. He lay 
on his side, hands fastened behind his back, a massive young tough with dark brows, a 
potato nose, and a prim rosebud mouth that he'd tried to hide beneath a soup-strainer 
moustache. He eyed me woozily and whispered, "Wha'?" 

"Gag the others," I told Ildiko. "This beauty will do for interrogation." 

I went to my pack's med kit and got a couple of penverol dosers, not nearly as 
effective as psychotronic machines but much more portable. Turning his head, I pulled 
open the captive's collar, laid the tiny purple pillows on either side of his larynx, X side 


down, and pressed them firmly with my thumb and index finger. Microexplosions 
injected the drug into his carotid arteries. His eyes rolled and the preposterously dainty 
mouth sagged open. 

"What's your name?" I asked after a few minutes had passed. 

He stared at me in pained puzzlement. "Mmm... mmm." 

"Name," I repeated. 

He spoke in a slow, affectless voice. "Mmm. Darrel ... Ridenour." 

"Are you employed by Galapharma AC, Darrel?" 

"Ye-es." 

"What is your position?" 

"Ex-external s-security agent... fourth grade." 

"What is the nature of the facility where you're stationed?" 

"It's... a genen clinic. S-S-Secret." 

"Are Haluk being processed in there?" 

"No .. . yes! Ahhh! No! ... Yes!" The drug was working, but a person with 
exceptionally strong willpower would be able to resist it. I hoped that Darrel wasn't one 
of those. 

"Who's in charge of the facility?" 

He really didn't want to answer that one. His eyes darted wildly, a grating moan 
welled up from his throat, and he thrashed and strained against the plastic cuffs that 
imprisoned his wrists and ankles. Ildiko held him down. I repeated the question twice 
before he replied. 

"Deputy Security Chief Erik Skogstad... in charge. Duty Officer... Jim Matsukawa." 

Skogstad was the Gala agent who'd been unable to supervise my assassination due to 
the press of other urgent business. Garth Wing Lee had told me that Skogstad was 
responsible for Ollie Schneider. 

"Is Skogstad inside the facility?" Was there a chance we might nab a primo Gala 
spook as well as a Rampart turncoat? 

"Yes... aaah! No! No! He's... offworld." 

So much for catching two fish in one net. "Where is he? On what planet?" 

Once again Ridenour balked, but finally: "Artiuk... meeting with the Servant of 
Servants of Luk." 

That was a shocker. The SSL was the paramount leader of the Haluk race. "What's 
this meeting about?" 

"Rumor... Big Seven Concern executives came out from Earth." 

In anticipation of Rampart's capitulation to Galapharma? 

"What are the Concern execs talking to the Servant about, Darrel?" 

This time his denial was agonized. "Don't know! Don't know! It hurts ... Make it 
stop!" He screamed and fell back, mumbling. 

I said, "Rats." 

"Perhaps he's hypersensitive to the drug," Ildiko said. "Ease up, Helly. I'll give him a 
calmative." 

She fetched another doser and did the injection. In a few minutes Ridenour relaxed. 
He asked for water and she put a canteen to his lips. When he seemed to have recovered, 
I continued the questioning. 

"How many humans in your security force?" 


"T-Twelve." 

"How many Haluk guards?" 

"Thirty-two." 

"Do only the human guards carry blasters?" 

He gave a barely perceptible nod. On Cravat it had been the same. The alien security 
forces were armed only with stun-guns. "How about noncombatant personnel inside the 
facility? What do they do?" 

Two humans were genetic engineers. There were also three human hopper pilots. 
Twenty Haluk cooks, bottlewashers, and all-around domestics took care of the scut work. 

"Very good, Darrel. Now I'm going to show you a picture." I held up Schneider's mug 
shot. "Look at this carefully. Have you ever seen this man?" 

He squinted at the e-book screen. "Looks like ... that human motherfucker, John 
Green." 

"Is Green inside your facility?" I held my breath in suppressed excitement. "Does he 
work there?" 

"Stays in the administration block... plays computer games. Reads. Drinks. Doesn't 
work." 

I tried to get more information about "John Green," but Darrel seemed genuinely not 
to know. 

"How about these men?" I showed Ridenour the other four Rampart ExSec traitors. 

He burst into hysterical laughter. "They're working! Oh, yes! They're really working." 

"What are you talking about? What do they do?" 

"In the dystasis tanks ... sharing their DNA." He was cackling like a madman, eyes 
squeezed tightly shut. "DNA!" he howled. "Sharing their DNA!" 

"Sweet Jesus," Ildiko whispered. 

I said to her, "I figured Ollie might have kept back incriminating data that made 
Galapharma handle him with care. I guess his buddies weren't included in the deal." 

Her face was full of horror. "Can we get the poor bastards out of there?" 

"Our job is to get Schneider out," I said, "and don't forget our people waiting back at 
the privateer crash site. Maybe we can convince Zone Patrol to raid the place later. 
There'll be other humans imprisoned there besides Ollie's quintet. The genengineers use 
them for tissue-culture donors." 

 

I resumed my interrogation of Darrel Ridenour. His hysterical laughter had ceased. 
The new medication rendered him apathetic and almost docile. He readily revealed the 
internal layout of the facility, the nature and position of its defenses, and the deployment 
of human and Haluk forces inside. The three antiaircraft blaster turrets on the roof were 
operated from a fire control center in the administration module. There were two other 
ESC-10XA hoppers in the underground hangar. One was inoperative, undergoing routine 
engine maintenance. 

I was drafting a map of the target's interior and discussing assault tactics with Ildy 
when the cockpit com unit sounded off. 

"Hopfrog Two, base. You copy? Frog Two, give a status report. Come back, Frog 
Two." 

Ridenour began to shriek at the top of his lungs. I told Ildy to gag him and went to the 
command seat. 


The base operator said, "Come back, Frog Two. What the hell you guys doing out 
there? Roasting friggin' marshmallows?" 

I did a rat-a-tat on the com pad at the same time that I mouthed broken gibberish. 

"Say again, Two? You're breaking up." 

I repeated the maneuver. 

"Frog Two, go to backup com system. Primary has a glitch. I say, go to backup com, 
Two. Do you copy?" 

One more time on the garble. 

A different voice, full of no-nonsense authority, rang from the speaker. "Hopfrog 
Two, return to base immediately! Duty Officer Matsukawa here. Return to base. Do you 
copy, Hop-frog Two?" 

I did a very brief garble response, shut off the communicator, and sat there thinking. 
Ildiko was wrapping the five prisoners in a big cargo net and hooking the squirming 
bundle to the deck tie-downs. 

I said, "You ever played gunny on one of these aircraft, babe?" 

"On a better one. ESC-15XB. Had twin cannons and a TND torpedo launcher besides 
the Kagi blue-rays. Pretty much the same targeting setup as the 10XA, though. You got 
apian?" 

I told her what it was. "What do you think? Tell me straight. You're the assault 
expert." 

"Depends on whether you've evaluated the target correctly, Helly. And whether 
Darrel told us the truth about its defenses. Given a thumbs-up on both points, I'd say go 
for it. We've still got the advantage of surprise. But once we start pounding, there's no 
way we can prevent them sending a sub-space call for help—short of taking out the 
facility's central module and maybe losing your prize, Schneider, in the rubble. If there's a 
hostile cruiser within striking range, we could end up screwed even if the ground action 
succeeds." 

"I'll check that with Joe right now. You take the right-hand seat. Light the engines and 
do a run-up on the weaponry. Back in a short." 

I clapped on my helmet, hurried outside, and called Chispa Dos on the lasercom, 
praying that the big rock pinnacle wasn't blocking my hat-beam to the orbiting starship. 

To my relief, Joe responded. 

"I need you to get on the high-resolution scanner," I said, "and do a full-sky search for 
starships incoming this solar system—especially anything that smells like a Haluk or 
Galapharma express cruiser." 

"I'm ahead of you, Helly. Been combing the ether since we parked. This Bodascon 
prototype of yours has a really righteous ship-sniffer. Wait one. Gotta resort the swarm—
whoa! That's new." 

"What?" 

"A possible bandit just coming into range at sixty lights, bopping right along at sixty-
three ross. What do you know: fuel signature indicates a Haluk vessel." 

"Goddammit to fuckin' hell!" I wondered if Eric Skog-stad was returning early with a 
fresh load of Haluk genen subjects. 

"She's ex Artiuk. That's their principal Spur colony. Jeez! I never knew the Haluk 
flew anything that hot." 

It was no surprise to me. I'd barely escaped being creamed by a similarly speedy 


Haluk starship on the way to Cravat. I suspected that the colossal flagship of the Servant 
of Servants, which had nearly been the death of me at Helly's Comet, was even faster. 
"You confirm a Dagasatt system vector for the bandit?" 

"That's an affirm." 

"Okay, listen up, Joe. You'll have to go out and kill it. We've got no choice. O'Toole's 
dead, but Ildy and 1 have grabbed an armed Vorlon hopper on the QT and we're ready to 
attack. The opposition is bound to put out a subspace squawk when we initiate. If that 
Haluk boat catches the call, it'll come charging in, loaded for bear. It might even notify 
the local yokels and we'll have Squeaker gunships up the wazoo." 

"You have any idea of the Haluk's shipscan range?" 

"Less than yours. Maybe thirty, forty lights." 

"If you can delay your assault for about half an hour, I'll be able to nab the bandit 
with his pants down." 

"We'll do our best to oblige. Happy trails, pardner. I'm gone." 

I hurried back inside the aircraft, slapped the hatch closure control, and popped off 
my helmet. "There's a fast Haluk starship coming," I told Ildiko. "Joe will play 
exterminator. Let's try to stall the attack for at least half an hour so he can—" 

"Helly," she said calmly, "a second hostile hopper just came up on the lift out there. 
Sit down and fly this crate. It's party time." 

 

 

Chapter 10 

 

We stayed put while a black Vorlon aircraft identical to ours lofted off the pad and 
approached at a low altitude. It called itself Hopfrog One and tried continuously to make 
contact with us. 

"Uh . .. Hopfrog Two? Is your position hazardous? Is it safe for us to land? Come 
back to One, Frog Two." 

Circling slowly above our position, observers inside the other ship rubbernecked the 
smokes and us, assessing the situation. The crew of Hopfrog One knew that our engines 
were powered up. I'd engaged the wave-bender shield, so they couldn't tell how many 
live people were inside our aircraft. They could see footprints and body dragmarks in the 
sand around us. I hoped they wouldn't interpret the spoor correctly. 

"Frog Two, do you have casualties? Can you exit the aircraft and signal manually? 
Frog Two, if you copy, exit your aircraft." 

Ildy and I waited. 

"Hopfrog Two, Frog One is surveilling the terrain and then coming in for a touch." 

The aircraft's circular flight path widened, taking it behind Corkscrew Pinnacle and 
momentarily beyond the sight line of the Haluk facility. That was what Ildiko had been 
waiting for. 

She had disabled the Harvey's electronic targeter to avoid alerting her prey. Using the 
backup optical reticle to track it like a duck in flight, she blew Hopfrog One out of the 
sky with our HA-5 actinic cannon, vaporizing the top of the rock formation along with it. 

We bounced in the shock wave. The columns of oily smoke flattened and coalesced 
and swirled around the surface of the ground like a mass of tangled inky fabric. A split 
second later I had us airborne, heading straight for the target, flying through smoke at an 


altitude of less than two meters. 

Abandoning the controls of the too-powerful Harvey cannon, Ildy used the twin 
BRB-200 blue-beamers to behead the facility's tower. The larger antennas controlling the 
PHBA sensors and the GBD generator went tumbling down. The dissimulator umbrella 
winked out. As the upper parts of the surrounding formations lost their fuzziness, drifting 
smoke began to obscure the ground around the facility itself. 

Someone inside pulled his shit together and the small Kagi guns in the defensive ring 
began peppering us with blue blazes. Our ship's armor held firm against the relatively 
weak antipersonnel lasers. 

A console alarm light began flashing. The ship's computer said: Alert. Alert. TG-383 
target acquisition field seeking this aircraft. 

"The roof turrets!" I yelled. 

Three fat white beams sizzled through the smoke above our hopper. 

"Easy does it," Ildy murmured. "Their guns can't depress far enough to acquire us." 
She drilled the east- and west-wing emplacements without significant harm to the 
building beneath, just as we'd planned. The third turret continued to fire. "Go around so I 
can take it out." 

I sent our Vorlon on a screaming turn barely above the surface of the lake so she 
could get a clear shot at the north wing. Gouts of futile Kagi photons bathed us like the 
dew covers Dixie. The blaster in the undamaged turret continued to discharge, exploding 
great chunks out of the red mountain behind us until Ildy's precision bursts with the BRB-
200s melted its firing mechanism. 

Rockfalls thundered down from the battered Jukebox formation and splashed into the 
lake. By now the entire basin was hazy with smoke from the petroleum fires. I had no 
doubt that observers inside the facility could still see us. 

I zoomed straight up to an altitude of fifty meters. Ildy ticked off the small Kagis in 
the inner perimeter defense one by one, as though playing a video game. 

"Atta gal!" I exulted. 

She grinned. "Want a job done, hire a pro." 

We were hovering directly above the central module of the target. There was no 
visible activity down below. None of the avalanche material from the butte had reached 
the facility walls. 

It seemed likely that we'd effectively disarmed them. The weaponry left inside had to 
be light stuff. In a facility like this, the windows were almost certainly bulletproof, 
impossible to shoot through with portable weaponry—from either side. I didn't think the 
opposition would be stupid enough to open a window and shoot a homing missile or a 
magnum HE grenade at us, but I was taking no chances. 

I activated the com unit's low-band emergency channel. They'd receive that even with 
the tower antennas dead. 

"Hello, the base! Stand down! Stand down! Do not fire through the windows. If you 
fire through the windows we'll destroy you with our cannon. You copy that?" 

No reply. 

"Base, we want to talk to D.O. Jim Matsukawa. Come back, Jim." 

Silence. 

"Whack the rest of Corkscrew Pinnacle," I told Ildy. "Get their attention." 

She took the HA-5 and blasted the broken red-rock column to plasma. A single huge 


mushroom of scarlet-painted black smoke belched skyward from the abruptly enlarged 
petro pit at the formation's base, sucking the ground-hugging haze along with it. 

"Yeow!" said Ildy. 

I called, "Hello, down there! Anybody copy in the base? You in there, Jim? I sure 
hope you weren't aboard Hopfrog One, oF buddy. It's gone to the last roundup—along 
with a bunch of blaster turrets and perimeter guns and that upstanding piece of local real 
estate just south of your place." 

"A duty officer would stay at his post," Ildiko whispered. "He's there." 

I knew that. "Jimbo? Naughty, naughty! I know what you're doing, my man. You're 
sending a subspace shout to that Haluk starship vectoring in from Artiuk. But he'll never 
get here in time to save your ass. Neither will any of your Squeaky pals. You'll have to 
negotiate with us if you want you and your people to survive this little faceoff. How 
about it?" 

Nada from the facility. He was a stubborn one. 

"You're disappointing me, Jim. Do I have to destroy one of the wings of your 
installation and kill a bunch of innocent Haluk floaters? I don't want to hit you again. Not 
unless I have to. Talk to me. Save lives. You listening? I'm going to count to three, then 
take out your north wing. One—" 

"Matsukawa here," said that voice full of no-nonsense authority. "Who are you?" 

"Call me Geronimo. You guys have something that belongs to me. Hand it over and 
I'll go away without any more hostile action." 

There was a long pause. Then: "What do you want, Geronimo?" 

"It's more of a who than a what. You have a man in your facility by the name of John 
Green—" 

He broke in furiously. "So that's it! You fucking idiots, you'll never get away—" 

"Shut up Jim. I mean it." 

He did, while I cheered inwardly. The Galapharma officer obviously believed that 
Ollie Schneider's confederates had come to rescue him. Far be it from me to correct the 
misperception. 

I said, "The continuing good health of my dear old friend is what will keep you and 
yours alive, Jim. If he's damaged or he dies, we wipe out the entire installation and call it 
the John Green Memorial Slag Heap. Do you copy?" 

"Yes," said Matsukawa. He was calm again. 

"Okay. I'll give you five minutes to suit John up and send him out the front door." 

"We'll need more than five minutes, Geronimo. Your friend is still in the sack. He 
likes to sleep in after a night of overindulgence. Give us twenty minutes, minimum." 

"He's stalling," Ildiko murmured. 

"Maybe," I whispered back, "but I don't know what we can do about it—short of 
blowing a hole in the wall and marching inside to collect our prize package in person." 

I opened the com again. "Okay, Jim. You've got fifteen minutes—not twenty—before 
we open fire. Clock starts running on my mark. I expect to see John Green come out that 
south door alone, unmasked and unhooded so we can confirm his identity. Give him a 
com handset so we can talk to him and make certain you haven't harmed him in any way. 
Copy that?" 

"Affirmative." 

"Mark," I said quietly. "Countdown is running." 


"Matsukawa out." 

"Well, hell!" Ildy said. "That was almost too easy—if Schneider's as important as you 
say he is." 

"He's important enough to write Galapharma's obituary, alive or dead. Which poses a 
pesky dilemma for our Jim. He'll be consulting with his boss, Skogstad, and I'm betting 
Skogstad will bump the buck to a higher level still. Maybe even Alistair Drummond 
himself." 

"Oh, man." 

"They'll weigh the alternatives, and most of them suck. If they surrender the prize, we 
win. If they refuse to do it, we still win after we destroy the installation and Schneider, 
and the big insurance policy comes due. Their best bet is to do neither of the above. I 
think they'll hand over the prize, then immediately try to take him back. Let's be 
prepared." 

Once again we waited. Billowing smoke spread in a high layer that hid Dagasatt's 
sun, but things were relatively clear where we were, hanging in midair fifty meters above 
the target. I'd moved HopfrogTwo southward just a tad so we had a good view of the all-
important door. 

Ildiko and I put on most of the combat gear we'd discarded earlier, excluding the 
backpacks but including the sidearms. The hopper's ground scanner was set to alert us if 
anything larger than an ant moved in the vicinity of the building below. 

She sat quietly, humming an unfamiliar melody and wiping out the inside of her 
helmet with decrud solution, while I went aft to check on the prisoners. 

They were still secure in their cargo-net wrapping, bunched up in a parody of a love 
pile. Four of them glared ferociously at me and gave loud grunts through their gags, but 
Barrel Ridenour appeared to be unconscious. I hoped the penverol hadn't shtonkered his 
brain permanently. There were questions he still hadn't answered to my satisfaction. 

And something else... 

"I think we'll have to take Darrel along with us when we go," I remarked to Ildy. 
"Maybe these other jokers, too. We need to do a proper interrogation." 

"Ridenour's talk about the Big Seven meeting on the Haluk planet got you curious?" 

"Damn straight. It's funny, a low-ranker like Darrel knowing a sensitive piece of 
intelligence like that." 

She shrugged. "Rumors fly in isolated little installations like this one. It's hard to keep 
anything secret. Same thing happens at remote Zone Patrol outposts." 

"Something else is bothering me. A weird thing that Darrel said." I shook my head, 
looking down at his unmoving body. "Damned if I can remember what it was." 

"It's been a rough day, man. Too much distracting stuff going on." 

"Yeah, right. Death and destruction can really screw up your concentration." 

"It'll come to you later," she reassured me, "when you're just about to fall asleep. 
Always works for me that way." 

"Sleep! If we get out of here alive, I'm going to stay in bed for a week." 

"Copy that," said Ildiko wistfully. 

I returned to the command seat, checked my own helmet— a little ripe inside, but 
what the hell—and tried to do a mental replay of the Q&A session I'd had with Darrel. 

What was it that had struck me? Not a piece of information: an unexpected turn of 
phrase. Something that slipped past while I was pumped up at the news about Schneider, 


when Darrel confirmed my hope that the archturncoat was actually there inside the 
facility, using the alias of— 

It hit me. And the bottom dropped out of my stomach. 

Darrel had looked at Ollie's picture and said, "Looks like that human motherfucker, 
John Green." 

Human.. . 

I whispered, "Shit!" 

Ildiko was frowning. "Helly, what is it?" 

Maybe it had been just a slip of the tongue, understandable given Ridenour's drug-
induced state of agitation. And maybe not. 

"A passing nasty thought. It'll have to keep. I want to brief you on what comes next in 
Operation Q. This race of ours is coming down to the wire, babe, and there's no time for 
side issues." 

Precisely on the fifteen-minute mark the door of the facility opened. It was actually a 
small airlock. A man of imposing physique stood on the threshold, clad in an enviro 
jumpsuit with the hood off. Behind him was not only darkness, but also a scannerproof 
force-field that probably screened a heavily armed SWAT team. 

The man in the doorway lifted a com unit and spoke. "Geronimo? John Green here." 

Oliver Schneider and I had met only once face-to-face, at a wild and memorable 
Rampart board meeting on Seriphos, where my father announced that he was cutting 
ExSec out of the loop and placing "Helmut Icicle" and his squad of irregulars in charge of 
Eve's kidnapping investigation. At the time, Schneider didn't recognize me as the 
banished black-sheep member of the Frost family. 

I figured he'd done his homework by now and might remember my voice. It has a sort 
of cowboy je ne sais quoi. And after fifteen long minutes, maybe Jim Matsukawa had 
managed to scrounge up a voice-print machine and hook it to the com unit, in hopes of 
identifying Geronimo himself. Neither of these contingencies fit my present plans. 

So Ildy was going to do the negotiating from here on in. I'd prompted her on what to 
say. Both of us were wearing our helmets, unrecognizable through the aircraft's 
windshield. 

She spoke to the com through her annunciator. "Good day, Citizen Green. I'm 
Geronimo's deputy, Zsa Zsa. Are you in good health?" 

"I suppose so," came the grudging retort. 

Through the ship's ground scanner I studied the face of the man in the doorway. He 
was about fifty years old. His bulldog jaw and somber dark stare confirmed that he was 
my quarry, the former Rampart Vice President for Confidential Services and Galapharma 
mole, Oliver Schneider. He'd gained weight during his confinement on Dagasatt, and also 
acquired a set of deplorable bags under his eyes and scarlike stress furrows beside his 
wide mouth. He hadn't bothered with shave-gel for the last couple of days, either. His 
hair, which I remembered as a spruce crew cut, was overgrown and unkempt. 

Disengaging Hopfrog Two's autopilot, I slowly brought the aircraft down. I'd taken 
control of our weapons system. 

"We're friends, John Green," Ildiko announced, "sent by certain of your former 
colleagues to take you out of here—" 

"So you say!" he snapped. "How do I know you aren't a gang of outlaws ready to sell 
me to Simon Frost like a side of fuckin'beef?" 


"How do you know," she replied sweetly, "that you won't end up like the four ExSec 
officers who fled with you—a human vegetable adrift in a dystasis tank while the Haluk 
siphon off your DNA?" 

His mouth dropped open in shock. "How do you know about that?" 

"I know a good deal, John Green. For example: five weeks from now, the Rampart 
Board of Directors will vote on the Galapharma acquisition bid for the last time. It's a 
virtual certainty that they'll capitulate to Alistair Drummond. Then your usefulness will 
be at an end. Why should Drummond keep you alive when your evidence against his 
Concern has become a dead issue?" 

"He—He has to. If you know so much, you know that." 

"I'm sure Drummond made many promises. To you and to the four officers who 
accompanied you to Dagasatt. But he broke his promises to your associates, didn't he? 
Why should he treat you any differently?" 

Schneider was silent. 

I'd brought the Vorlon down to hover a couple of meters above the ground, no more 
than a long stone's throw from the open door of the facility. The entry was bathed in the 
faint purplish glow of our targeting field. So was Oliver Schneider. 

Matsukawa and his goons were probably sweeping us with six different kinds of spy-
beams through the facility windows, and the SWAT team lurking behind Ollie had us 
cold in their sights. But our ship's own wave-bender would stymie most of the scans, and 
our hull armor would stop most types of portable weaponry. 

I figured that all we really had to fear now was a missile or a grenade attack through 
that open airlock door. 1 was gambling that they wouldn't want to endanger the prize by 
shooting over or around him. The doorway was too small. 

Of course, if Ollie stepped aside... 

Ildy was saying, "We know you must have an insurance policy forcing Galapharma to 
keep you alive. But think about this: when Rampart Starcorp no longer exists as a legal 
entity, the damage you inflicted upon it as a secret agent of Galapharma will no longer be 
legally actionable. Drummond will have nothing to fear from you anymore. The CHW 
Judiciary can't prosecute a crime against an extinct corporation." 

True. But if I'd guessed right, Ollie had also engineered the death of Rampart's Chief 
Research Officer, Yaoshuang Qiu, and maybe other people as well. There was no statute 
of limitations on murder. 

I didn't want Schneider to think about that. Besides, time was a-wasting. Qastt 
gunships sent by corrupted local officials might already be on the way from Taqtaq or 
one of the other refinery cities. 

Pulling out my e-book, I wrote, Show him the stick! and held it in front of Ildy. She 
picked up the hint instantly. 

"Citizen Green, think carefully. Are you willing to trust your life to a megalomaniac 
like Alistair Drummond, a proven liar? He's negotiated a secret trade deal with a race of 
aliens who have always hated and feared humanity. He did this without a thought to the 
dangerous political ramifications. He was thinking only about profits for Galapharma and 
setting himself up as the most powerful man in the Hundred Concerns—the most 
powerful man in the galaxy! He used you, John Green, just as he used millions of other 
people. Now you're worse than expendable: you're a threat." 

Oliver Schneider's form had stiffened as she talked. "You've come directly from 


Rampart, haven't you! You're not outlaws. No outlaw would know what you know." 

I wrote another note to Ildy: Now show him the carrot. 

"If you come with us willingly," she said, "Rampart will petition CHW to grant you 
full immunity in exchange for freely reiterating your psychotronic testimony against 
Alistair Drummond and Galapharma in open court. This will strengthen Rampart's case." 

"I know." He was still vacillating. 

I wrote: Treason. 

She said, "John Green, try to understand what this conspiracy involves. Galapharma 
hasn't just plotted to destroy a small rival—it's committed treason. The Haluk intend to 
wage war against the Commonwealth. Alistair Drummond and his Concern allies are too 
power-hungry and blinded by greed to see it. They are aiders and abettors of a hostile 
alien race. Their shortsightedness is criminal. We need your help to thwart this monstrous 
conspiracy. How can you refuse?" 

CCT « 

"There's no more time for discussion. Come out of the doorway, John. Walk a straight 
line toward our ship. No tricks. The people hiding behind you don't dare harm you... not 
while they think they still have a chance to recapture you later. But they won't do that. 
We'll protect you with all of Rampart's resources. Come out to our ship now." 

"I'm coming," said Oliver Schneider. 

He took about ten steps toward us, and then everything went to hell. 

Understandably, Ildiko and I were both riveted by the approach of the man we'd 
risked our lives to find. We were alert for enemy fire that might emanate from the airlock 
or the windows, but we'd forgotten about the lift on the hopper pad a hundred meters or 
so to our left. 

As the defenders had no doubt intended. 

Later, I deduced that during the critical fifteen minutes we'd waited for Ollie, the 
people inside the facility had disconnected the caution lights and other alarms 
surrounding the circular opening. They'd also hauled the third Vorlon ESC-10XA, the 
one grounded for engine overhaul—but still armed and deadly—onto the elevator 
platform. The lift lid was now able to whisk back without warning and allow Hopfrog 
Three to rise and fire on us. 

They didn't want to harm Schneider with cannon back-flare, so they hit us right in the 
powerplant with their twin BRB-200 lasers. 

The jewel-fuel explosion almost deafened me. I had no chance to use our own ship's 
weapons. The Vorlon, which weighed about thirty tons when deprived of antigrav lift, 
dropped two meters onto the stony ground. The right landing gear buckled in the impact 
and the ship tilted sideways, belly toward the adversary, who continued to fire. Ildiko and 
I tumbled against the starboard cockpit bulkhead. Our LGF-18 grenade launchers, which 
we'd propped against the instrument console, clanged on top of us. 

Flickering azure beams punched holes in the hull. Electronic systems exploded and 
spat sparks. The ship interior was full of smoke, and something hissed ominously back in 
the stern compartment. Ghastly muffled sounds came from the netted prisoners. Hopfrog 
Two creaked and lurched as the lasers continued to stab at it. 

"Out! Out!" I screamed into my helmet, scrambling over the instrumentation, 
grabbing hold of the manual hatch release underfoot and hauling at it with all my 
strength. The damaged thing slid reluctantly on its bent tracks, then jammed before it was 


halfway open. 

Ildiko wormed her way through, hauling the launchers with her. I was a lot bigger and 
I nearly didn't make it. Stuck feet first in the narrow slot, kicking like a fool, I finally had 
the wit to smack the quick-release buckle on my equipment belt and drop down and out 
without my sidearms. Blue rays from the big Kagis were zapping holes in the ceramalloy 
doorframe a hand's breadth from my helmet visor. 

As I crashed to the dirt like a sack of bricks, a thunderous detonation shook the 
ground. A magnum HE grenade round had hit something important over on the hopper 
pad. 

In my helmet phones a satisfied female voice said, "Vis-zontldtasra, assholes." 

Suddenly, silence. No more beams, no more booms. 

I lay there under the wreck for a few seconds, stunned by the fall, and heard a lesser 
explosion followed by a muffled phut phut phut phut. Standard HE grenade, plus sleepy-
gas rounds going off inside a confined space. 

"Yes!" said Ildiko. "And that's all, kisbaba." 

With shaking hands I retrieved my belt with its Ivanov and Kagi pistols, which still 
dangled from the partially open hatch overhead, picked up my LGF-18, and crawled out 
from under the Vorlon. It was perforated like an ebony Swiss cheese with laser hits and 
smoldering vigorously at the stern. 

Ildiko sat on the ground, cradling her grenade launcher in her lap while she reloaded 
it. "You okay, Chief Inspector, sir?" 

"Alive, Lieutenant, ma'am ... and kicking myself for getting caught like a fat rat in a 
drainpipe. Congratulations one more time." 

Hopfrog Three was now nothing but burning junk scattered around the canted lift 
platform. Wisps of smoke and pearly pink gas curled from the open doorway to the Haluk 
facility. I magnified the view and saw a jumble of torn bodies inside the airlock. The 
inner door had been blown apart. 

A dozen meters in front of the facility, lying prostrate with both arms flung out, was 
Oliver Schneider. He wasn't moving. 

"Fired over his head after the hopper blast knocked him down," Ildiko said. "Sorry, 
Helly. I had no choice." 

"I agree. You want to check on our prisoners? I'll take a look at John Green." 

I drew my Ivanov and trudged out to him. The sleepy-gas wafting out the facility door 
hadn't reached him yet and he was conscious, staring at the smoky sky and smiling, as if 
at some private amusement. He lay flat on his back. The excess flesh had stretched away 
from his face and throat, giving him the unexpectedly youthful look you often see on 
embalmed bodies. 

Schneider wasn't dead, but there were wounds. Shrapnel bits from the ship Ildy 
destroyed had struck him along his right side. He had a head injury that bled copiously 
and his light enviro jumpsuit leaked scarlet in four or five places. 

His lips moved. I knelt beside him. The wind was blowing the gas eastward, away 
from us. I tongued my helmet's annunciator. "Hey, Ollie, old hoss-thief. How ya doing?" 

"Asahel Frost?" He began to laugh, and the faint sound was a broken crackle like 
trodden autumn leaves. "I wondered if it might be you pulling this loony stunt. 
Troublemaker from the git-go . . ." 

"That's me," I admitted. 


"They ... wanted me to step aside fast once I was out the door, get out of range so a 
squad hiding behind me could hit your ship. Said I would, then didn't." More laughter. 
"Really pissed 'em off." 

"We figured it was something like that." 

"Didn't know Jim Matsukawa was planning to hoist the grounded Vorlon. He's a 
sharp bastard." 

"Sorry you got caught." 

"That's the way it goes sometimes." 

"I don't think your wounds are too serious. We'll have you patched up pretty soon." 

He made a faint sound of assent that turned into a groan and a muttered obscenity. 

"Ollie, listen. I've got to ask you about your insurance policy against Galapharma. 
Will it remain in force if we take you off Dagasatt? We don't want your evidence released 
prematurely if it can be avoided." 

"I'll have to make a subspace call to Earth no later than five days from now. 
Otherwise ... fireworks start." 

"We'll be evacuating you right away. Zone Patrol and Rampart ExSec will come in 
and mop up the operation a little later." 

"One other thing, Frost..." 

"Yeah?" 

"Go inside. Check out the three genetic engineering labs, then do what's right. My 
four men .. . you know how this fuckin' allomorph eradication process works?" 

"Yes." 

"My boys... the bastards are using them for tissue-culture donors. They're in dystasis, 
but once they're freed and put through psychoprobing by CHW, they'll go to Coventry 
Blue for sure. And you know what happens to corporate enforcers inside the walls." 

I did. Cruel and unusual punishment didn't begin to describe their fate. "Maybe we 
can work out the same deal for them that I offered you, if they agree to testify against 
Galapharma." 

He shook his head. "No good. Commonwealth Judiciary will never let all of us walk. 
Harry Piretti iced Qiu, the CRO. The others took down Clive Leighton and his girlfriend, 
disposed of Volta, Bransky, and Matsudo, smeared the Starcorp from one end of the Spur 
to the other." He managed a faint laugh, full of wry satisfaction. "We damn near handed 
Rampart to Alistair Drummond on a plate before you came along." 

"So, bad luck for your sidekicks," I said coldly, getting to my feet. "Good fuckin' luck 
for you." 

If I had anything to say about it—and, unfortunately, I didn't—both Ollie and his 
gang would end up with the book thrown at them, incarcerated in the Blue 
Disenfranchised Persons Reserve for the rest of their miserable lives. I felt no sympathy 
at all for the wounded man lying on the ground and even less for his murderous floater 
pals. 

He knew it, and yet he was actually pleading with me. "You'll get everything you 
need for your case against Gala from me, Frost. Please! ... Do my boys, save 'em from 
Blue, and I promise I'll cooperate fully with the psychoprobers. They'll get more out of 
me, quicker. You know how it works." 

"I'll do whatever I can to get immunity or reduced sentences for all of you. But it isn't 
my decision." 


"Goddamn Throwaway cop... might have known..." 

Ollie's voice faded. His face had gone translucent and his eyes drifted shut. Bits of 
smut from the burning Vorlon that Ildy and I had hijacked fell on his pale skin like black 
snow. The blood flow from his head wound had diminished to a trickle. 

Hauling out my poncho, I began to ease him into it. He groaned once, thrashed about 
weakly, and then became a dead weight in my arms. Accoutred as I was in helmet and 
combat gloves, I couldn't tell whether he was alive or not. 

Ildiko came dashing up. "All our prisoners in the wreck are dead. There's a chance the 
ammo stores in the stern might blow up any minute. Is the prize package still with us?" 

"A good question. Help me get him to a safer spot, upwind of the gas and out of range 
if the wreck blows. Let's try the hopper pad. The lift lid's bent up. Maybe we can take 
cover behind it." 

It was a little under a hundred meters away. We hoisted Schneider together and ran 
for it. No sooner had we dragged him behind the canted elevator deck than our aircraft 
exploded, sending a wave of dust, smoke, and diluted sleepy-gas rolling over us. 

I lay over Schneider, protecting him with my soft-armored body from the few bits of 
debris that rained down. I'd lowered the poncho hood over his face, but he spasmed 
beneath me as AG97 entered his lungs and then fell back limply. 

"Shit," I muttered. 

Ildy pushed me aside and carefully lifted one of Ollie's eyelids. The eye was rolled 
back. As we watched, it returned slowly to its normal position, the pupil shrunk to a 
pinpoint. 

"He's alive," she said. "AG97 is supposed to have minimal side effects on a healthy 
subject. How bad were his wounds?" 

"Maybe not too serious. Hard to say." I was struggling to my feet, resettling my 
equipment. There was no time to discuss the patient. "You put up a tylar tent here and do 
what you can for him. I've got to get inside that facility and call for the cavalry.. . if there 
is any cavalry." 

"Do you have a fallback option, Helly?" 

I surveyed the terrain for a minute. Conical Butte, with its apron of talus, was due 
west of our position. To the southwest were the original Three Smokes, and behind them, 
about four zigzaggy kilometers away, the pointed volcanic crags that concealed our tuqo. 
The intervening plain was rocky gravel with a few boulders. At full magnification my 
visor showed no patches of cinders or smoky ground. 

"If the balloon goes up," I said, "make for the tuqo. Return to the privateer at top 
speed and tell Mimo to blast off." 

"Understood." 

"And watch out for survivors coming up the elevator shaft. The gas you pumped in 
the front door might not have penetrated this far." 

I shouldered my grenade launcher and headed for the entrance to the facility. The 
hideously mangled dead inside the airlock were a Haluk SWAT team armed with heavy 
blasters and smart-missile launchers. Alarm bells that were already ringing insidiously in 
my mind cranked up a notch. Darrel had lied to me. The Galapharma agents at the secret 
Cravat facility hadn't trusted the xeno guard force with lethal weaponry. So what was 
happening here on Dagasatt? 

The inner airlock door had been completely destroyed by Ildy's grenade but the 


semicircular lobby area beyond seemed relatively undamaged. Signs on four wide-open 
corridors indicated the way to CENTRAL, GE1, GE2, and GE3. 

Red emergency indicators on the walls were flashing, and a computer voice 
yammered: Alert. Alert. AG90-type gas attack. Antidote is not in defensive arsenal. Alert. 
Alert... 

Well, that was a break. I hoped the place didn't have auto-sealing doors. Ildiko had 
pumped in four sleepy-gas rounds, enough to fill the whole building if nothing blocked it. 
A few molecules of AG97 sufficed to stun a rhino, and the gas swiftly penetrated all but 
the most advanced niters. I figured that the opposition should be down, unless the 
building had compartmentalized ventilation systems, or the occupants had managed to 
put on Air-Paks or oxygen. 

I hustled along the corridor leading into Central, and was suddenly aware that the 
nagging voice of the computer warning had finally shut off. I'd hung the LGF-18 on my 
back and drawn my Ivanov pistol. Everytime I passed a closed door, I flung it open in 
search of conscious combatants. I found none, but there were fallen Haluk everywhere. 

I wondered how many of the aliens were illicit sharers in the human genetic heritage, 
freed from the allomorphism that had limited their racial progress. Even more, I worried 
about the humans inside this establishment, and whether Oliver Schneider knew or even 
suspected what they might be. 

Most of the Haluk I encountered were in the gracile, fully active state: slender, wasp-
waisted beings with slate-blue skin, dressed in natty uniforms, fatigue coveralls, lab 
smocks, or the kind of casual alien clothing I had seen in the underground establishment 
of Cravat. The two sexes were only slightly different in appearance. Their skulls were 
finely shaped and had manes of platinum hair, variously styled. Gracile Haluk eyes were 
disproportionately large, brilliant blue, almond-shaped, and quite beautiful. By way of 
contrast, their arms, cheeks, foreheads, and long necks had prominent ridges and 
carunculated areas that seemed hideous by human standards. 

A few of the unconscious aliens were obviously genetically unaltered, since they had 
entered the transitional or lepi-dodermoid phase of their allomorphic cycle. The Haluk 
had evolved on an ancestral world with a very eccentric orbit that carried it dangerously 
near the sun for half of each four-hundred-day year. The race adapted, regularly changing 
its body form in response to the increased heat, dryness, and solar radiation flux of the 
deadly summer. 

As gracile Haluk turned into lepidoderms, intelligence declined and bodily functions 
slowly began to shut down. Lepidos were asexual, thick-limbed, barrel-bodied creatures 
able to perform only simple tasks. Greatly enlarged heads, scaled to insulate the sensitive 
brain, grew massive brow ridges to guard eyes that were now shielded by dark protective 
pigments. Noses and mouths shrank. As the cycle progressed toward the Great Change, 
the lepido body acquired more and more scales, at first dark blue, then changing to dull 
gold. Movement became ponderous and finally ceased. The ultimate testudinal phase was 
an immobile golden chrysalid in which the Haluk slept—estivated—for about 140 days. 
Then the cocoon opened and a fully functional gracile emerged, memories and 
intelligence intact... but way behind the times. 

Even though the Haluk had long since abandoned their appalling home world and 
settled on more hospitable planets, the annual cycle persisted. It was no longer 
synchronous, however. Individuals now cycled at different times from their peers, but 


allomorphism was still vexatiously inconvenient. 

Especially for a race that yearned to conquer the universe. 

I found Jim Matsukawa alone in the communication room, slumped before a subspace 
com unit with its viewscreen gone to auto standby. He was a sturdy, well-muscled 
specimen wearing a red-and-black Galapharma uniform, and although he seemed totally 
incapacitated, I clamped plastic manacles around his wrists and ankles before tipping him 
off the chair onto the floor. 

Even before I located him, I'd decided that Jim was going to accompany us offworld. 
As a material witness and potential informant, he was far superior to poor dead Darrel 
Ride-nour and his companions. Matsukawa's testimony was going to corroborate that of 
Oliver Schneider, justifying a full-scale investigation of this genen site by Zone Patrol 
and Rampart Security. 

Jim's DNA might yield even more interesting evidence. 

If the Haluk had actually demicloned the likes of Ridenour, a mere Gala ExSec Agent 
4th Grade, it seemed possible that they might also have replicated other humans assigned 
to the genen facility staff. In an isolated place like this, a Haluk demiclone-in-training 
could easily study the background and mannerisms of his unsuspecting donor before 
taking his place—and eventually moving on to a more strategic venue. 

Duty Officer Jim Matsukawa was a prime doppelganger candidate. An even more 
likely—and potentially valuable— one was Erik Skogstad, who had supervised the entire 
operation on behalf of Galapharma. In time, a Haluk mole such as Fake Erik might be 
able to penetrate the inner circles of Galapharma security—unless he happened to be 
driving that Haluk starship Joe Betancourt was stalking, in which case his fake-human 
DNA would soon mingle anonymously with the interstellar dust floating between 
Dagasatt and Artiuk. 

Taking a seat before the SS com unit, I asked it to tell me what stations Jim 
Matsukawa had called within the past hour. The list was a short one. 

1. [Encrypted designation], starship on interstellar course within Perseus Spur 

2. [Encrypted designation], planet Artiuk 

3. [Encrypted designation], Toronto, planet Earth 

4. [Different encrypted designation], Toronto, planet Earth 

I figured that the first call had gone to Skogstad, or whoever was piloting the 
approaching starship. The second alerted Haluk authorities, or Galapharma agents, on 
Artiuk to the attack on the facility. The third might have gone to Galapharma's home 
offices on Earth, notifying them of the attempt to grab Schneider. The recipient of the 
fourth message was a puzzler. It seemed unlikely that Matsukawa would call another 
Galapharma number in Toronto if he had already reported the emergency to Concern HQ. 
But who else would rate a priority communique? 

It didn't look as though Matsukawa had summoned any local Qastt gunships 
himself—at least not through the SS com—but there was always a possibility that others 
had done it for him. 

I sent out a call to Joe Betancourt aboard Chispa Dos. Over an hour had gone by since 
I'd told him to pursue and destroy the Haluk speedster. 

He responded at once and told me he'd carried out my orders. 

"It was really strange," Joe said, after I'd offered felicitations on his success and his 
survival. "I hid in a little dust-nebula and did a fairly typical hostile intercept of the 


Haluk. The ship refused to surrender, even when I demonstrated my superiority, so we 
engaged and I finished him off rather quickly. You'll never guess what was trash-talking 
at me from inside that zippy xeno crate." 

"A human," I said. 

"You got it! But it gets weirder. The pilot recognized Chispa, even though I had the 
transponder-ID blanked out. Flat out accused me of stealing his Y700 prototype! The 
man was seriously apeshit—madder about his ripped-off ship than about the fact that he 
was outgunned and outmaneuvered and about to go plasmatic." 

"Your opponent was very likely a major Galapharma operative named Erik Skogstad. 
Mimo sort of inherited his blitzboat as spoils of battle. I'll tell you the story later... So, did 
you get dinged at all in the dogfight?" 

"Not a scratch. My three Qastt passengers didn't even realize that anything hairy was 
going on until it was all over. How're you and Ildy?" 

"Both okay. We hit the facility successfully and that's where I'm calling from. 
Operation Q is just about a wrap. We captured the big prize. Unfortunately, Schneider 
was wounded by friendly fire during the penetration. I hope we can save him." 

A shocked pause. "Well, that's a shit shortcake." 

"The four lesser prizes are probably also still alive, but in no condition to be 
evacuated. I've taken the duty officer prisoner, and he'll be going out with us as a 
corroborating witness to what was happening in this damned place." 

"What was?" 

"There's no time to talk about it now. The important thing is for us to get out of here, 
fast. I don't know whether these clowns called for Qastt reinforcements. If they did, Ildy 
and I will deal with the situation as best we can. But we won't be able to last long." 

"Helly, you've got to get away from the facility. Take cover in the rocks, or 
something." 

"Affirmative. That's what I intend to do. How soon can you get back to Dagasatt?" 

"Twenty-three minutes suit you?" 

"Beautiful! You make good on that, I'll adopt you into the Frost family. Megabucks, 
colorful kinfolks, horseback rides, sunset barbecues, and all the Galapharma shit you can 
shovel." 

Joe Betancourt howled. "I'll take a pass on everything but the money. I'm gonna need 
lots to get my charter business going." 

"You'll get a bonus, along with everybody else. Now listen: there are other people 
you have to contact. First, get ahold of Mimo. Tell him to wait until you arrive to give 
protective cover from orbit. Then he can fly out on an oh-nine-oh course, hugging the 
bitumen, skip over the volcanoes, and exit the atmosphere over the Empty Sea. Escort the 
privateer to some hiding place in the system's Kuiper Cloud, then come back for us. 
Mimo can fly Chispa's gig down for the pickup while you hold off any Qastt that 
interfere. If our luck holds, there won't be any Qastt—but watch for other Haluk cruisers 
coming ex Artiuk. I think this facility may have been very important to them." 

"I copy all that. Any other orders?" 

"Contact Matt Gregoire on Seriphos. Ask her to send any armed Rampart ExSec or 
Fleet Security starships in the region to Dagasatt to reinforce you. There ought to be a 
fleet cutter on Cravat, if nothing else. And have her alert Cravat's hospital to expect us 
with Ollie Schneider—whenever." 


"Copy that." 

"She'll also have to notify Zone Patrol that we have firm evidence of human prisoners 
being held on Dagasatt, and set up a joint Rampart-ZP assault on this place. But not until 
we're all safely out of here. Tell Matt I'll contact her when we're en route to Cravat." 

"Anything else?" 

"Just hurry it up, Joe. I'm really sick to death of this fuckin'planet." 

Shutting off the SS com, I drew my Kagi pistol and blasted critical modules of the 
instrument to melted glop. Then I went off hurriedly in search of GE1, the east-wing 
genetic engineering lab. 

The central module had a confusing radial layout, and I was grateful for Darrel 
Ridenour's floor plan. I loped down now-silent corridors, only occasionally finding a 
fallen Haluk, and came at last to a heavy door, wide-open. Three unconscious technicians 
dressed in white coveralls lay crumpled just outside, and it was obvious they had been 
about to lock the lab and flee when the gas reached them. Two of the techs were Haluk 
and one was a middle-aged human woman. She wore a translator pendant and still held a 
key-card in her hand. 

I stepped over the sleepers into a dimly lit scene of bizarre familiarity. The laboratory 
was crowded with row upon row of upright, transparent technocoffins of the type used in 
the most elaborate forms of dynamic-stasis gene therapy. Bodies submerged in thick 
bubbly liquid floated inside the containers, suspended on intricate frames and connected 
to arcane gadgetry. The dystasis tanks seemed identical to those I'd seen in the Haluk 
facility on Cravat. 

Embedded in the gleaming black glass floor was a network of neon-red filaments that 
connected with the tank bottoms and illuminated the bodies from below, leaving them 
otherwise in womblike twilight. At the far end of the wing stood a collection of oddball 
machinery that also looked familiar. Multicolored spheres with pulsating inner lights, 
linked by more of the glowing red tubing, were mounted on a black glass platform next to 
banks of exotic monitoring equipment. 

To my layman's eye the assemblage looked more like a light sculpture than scientific 
apparatus. 

I started down the nearest aisle, examining the comatose floaters more closely. On 
Cravat the tanks had held what seemed to be hundreds of gracile Haluk—with the single 
conspicuous exception of my sister!—dressed in long silvery shifts that left only their 
feet, arms, and heads exposed. At first I believed the xenos were being treated with 
human DNA, vectored by the wide-spectrum transferase in PD32:C2, so that their 
allomorphic cycle would be eradicated. 

Later I found out from Eve what was really going on in the Cravat facility. The 
sickening discovery had confirmed my fears that the Haluk had hostile intentions toward 
the human race. 

And damned if it didn't look like the same sort of thing was happening here on 
Dagasatt! 

With an increasing sense of dread, I examined the silver-gowned beings in the tanks 
and discovered they were paired. Every other subject appeared to be a gracile Haluk, and 
alternating with them were humans. Or almost-humans. But the allomorph eradication 
process used a different, simpler technique for transferring DNA. 

Direct interconnection of genetic donor and recipient was necessary only for the 


demiclone procedure, which took much longer and was more complex. 

This is the way it worked: 

First, capture your human. Then place him or her into dystasis. Using PD32:C2 as a 
vector, insert selected nonallomor-phic Haluk DNA into the human subject, in order to 
preclude rejection syndrome in the alien recipient during the demiclone procedure. About 
twelve weeks later your demiclone template is ready. As a reversible side effect, the 
human donor has acquired the superficial appearance of a gracile Haluk—as had 
happened to Eve, albeit incompletely. 

Next, take one nonallomorphic Haluk and place him or her into a tank adjacent to the 
donor. Transfer an enormous amount of DNA from the modified human to the Haluk 
recipient, again using the PD32:C2 genen vector. In another twelve weeks or so the 
Haluk will have become a human-appearing replica of the donor, physically 
differentiated only by a small redundant gene sequence in the nucleus of each fake-
human body cell: a marker programmed into the demicloning process by Emily 
Konigsberg of Galapharma, unbeknownst to the Haluk. 

The big Concern, being justifiably suspicious of the demi-clone scheme but forced to 
accede to it, had made damn sure it could identify the fakes. It had also extracted firm 
promises from the alien leaders that only a few demiclones would be made, and installed 
its own security personnel at all of the Haluk genen facilities to ensure that the promises 
were kept. 

Maybe they had been, in some places. But not on Cravat. 

And not here on Dagasatt, either. 

I knew it was impossible for me and my tiny force to rescue any of the halukoid 
human donors. Disconnecting a dystasis subject was a delicate medical procedure that 
took time and special expertise, and we had neither. Later on, if Matt Gre-goire managed 
to convince Zone Patrol to raid Dagasatt for cause, or if Rampart ExSec was granted 
permission to do so by CHW, the floating prisoners might be freed and restored to their 
original human form. 

Or maybe not, if the Haluk got there first and carried the luckless donors off to 
another genen facility elsewhere. 

As for the demiclones, those rapers of human identity. . . 

When Ollie Schneider had said, "Do 'em," he was begging me to give his four friends 
a merciful death. I didn't have the right to do that. But at that moment I believed I did 
have the right to do something else, in retaliation for what had been done to the original 
Darrel Ridenour, to the other innocent human DNA-donors in this damned place, and to 
my sister Eve, who'd almost joined them. 

So I drew my Kagi pistol and went up and down the rows of tanks, first in the GE1 
laboratory wing and then in the two others. If the floater looked Haluk, I let it be; but if it 
seemed human, or almost human, I shot it in the head. 

When I was finished I took an antigrav tote that I'd found in one of the storerooms 
and went back to retrieve Jim Matsukawa—whoever and whatever he was. 

We reached the entrance of the facility just as the Qastt gunships began their 
bombardment. 

The first strike was a small one, in some far-distant wing. I had just reached the outer 
lobby with my prisoner when the building shook. My helmet sensors barely picked up the 
ensuing sound—but an instant later the facility's computer warning system began telling 


me what I already knew. 

Air attack alert. Air attack alert. GE2 integrity has been compromised by blaster fire. 

GE2 was the west wing, the one I had visited last of all before retrieving Jim 
Matsukawa. More hits made the floor tremble. Since there was no longer any need for 
communication secrecy, I called Ildiko on the regular helmet intercom. 

"Ildy, what's happening? Is it the Qastt?" 

"Affirm," came her level reply. "Three small gunships armed with medium-power 
blasters. Looks to me like they're trying to destroy the facility. Not a whole lot of 
firepower going, though, and the building is apparently well-armored. The prize and I are 
okay. What's your status?" 

"In the lobby with one prisoner. Any chance you can take the ships with grenades?" 

"Not a prayer. They're keeping their distance, hovering just below the smoke deck, 
altitude niner-three-three." A larger tremor shook the place and the computer 
announcement abruptly choked off in mid-cry. "Uh-oh! Looks like the west wing roof 
just breached, Helly. They're pounding the rubble." 

Doing 'em... 

I hopped over the bodies in the airlock and took a peek outside. The air was swirling 
with smoke and dust. Green photon blasts meteored down at a near-vertical angle, 
pulverizing the ruins. It was definitely a demolition derby. The Haluk had sent their allies 
to wipe out evidence of demicloning on Dagasatt. Even though the Squeaker cannons 
appeared to be only a third as powerful as the Harveys on the Vorlon hoppers, given 
enough time, they'd do the job. 

I said to Ildy, "Have you tried to contact Chispa?" 

"Affirm, every five minutes until the Qastt snowed up. No reply. All this crap floating 
in the air is weakening the lasercom HUV beam and Joe might not be able to read me. Or 
perhaps he's still escorting the privateer and out of range." 

"Can you take shelter down inside the elevator shaft?" 

"Negative. There's a lot of unstable-looking wreckage blocking the way. I didn't want 
to risk checking it out alone and leave Schneider unprotected. Maybe the two of us can 
figure something when you get over here. I've got a rap-pelling cable." 

"Right. I'll be making my break in a minute or two." 

The Qastt had left off firing on GE2, which was now completely flattened, and began 
to pound the facility's north wing. My visor had adjusted automatically to compensate for 
the murky air and I could see the hopper pad clearly. Would the gunners notice me 
making a break for it, towing my prisoner behind? They'd certainly have IR scanners, but 
the glow from nearby semimolten debris would tend to futz the blips made by me and Jim 
Matsukawa. I fervently wished I still had the camouflaging filo poncho I'd wrapped 
around Ollie Schneider. 

The antigrav tote with Matsukawa strapped to it floated over the airlock casualties 
with ease. Then I took off, and it was a matter of broken-field running through smoke and 
gouts of green flame while Ildy cheered me on. 

I nearly made it home safe. But less than a dozen meters from the pad I tripped over a 
jagged piece of hopper wreckage, slashing my right shin savagely and taking a header. I 
was unable to get up again and filled the helmet intercom with agonized curses. 

"Hang on. I'm coming," Ildy said. 

And she did—just as one of the Qastt gunships tardily noticed ground activity and 


took a shot at us with some sort of small actinic weapon. A white blast hit the ground 
three meters to my left. Another zorched the sand just behind Ildy. The Squeak could 
certainly see us with the ship's infrared scanner, but he seemed to be using an optical 
sight, not an auto-targeter, and the range was extreme. 

Ildy arrived and hauled me into a sitting position. Another shot, another miss. "Take 
him, dammit!" I indicated Matsukawa. "Never mind me." 

She said, "Oh, shut the fuck up." 

A moment later she'd rolled me onto the hovering tote. Draped sideways over Jim's 
body, hands and feet dragging on the ground, I made the rest of the trip dodging 
ingloriously through fireworks. The Qastt gunner got off one last wild shot before we 
reached the shelter of the makeshift bunker and dropped off his scanner. The demolition 
of Hopfrog Three had cracked the elevator piston near its base, tipping the circular 
platform sideways as well as angling it skyward almost thirty degrees. The elevator deck 
was about twenty-five meters in diameter, shielding us fairly well from the bombardment 
of the facility. 

"Thanks one more time,yet\" I gasped. 

Ildy said, "Brace yourself, cowboy. Time to dismount." 

She lowered the tote and carefully rolled me off. The pain in my shin was 
excruciating and the leg of my armored jumpsuit was sodden with blood. Hauling myself 
into a sitting position, I fumbled for the first-aid supplies in my belt pouch. Ildy used a 
special blade to cut open the pants leg and inspected the wound. Oliver Schneider's half-
visible filo-shrouded form lay close by, along with her grenade launcher. I'd lost mine 
somewhere along the way. 

After a momentary respite, the Qastt gunship was once again firing on us. But it 
hadn't changed its position and the actinic bursts were still being fired perpendicularly, 
sending melted blobs of ceramalloy arcing in all directions off the battered elevator 
platform. Realizing the futility of his attack, the lone gunman broke off. Meanwhile, 
photon cannons hammered the devastated facility's east wing. The Squeaks would smash 
Central next. Then they'd move off for a clear shot under our umbrella with their mean 
greens, and we'd be toast. 

Ildy announced, "You're slashed wide-open and this shin-bone's either busted or 
cracked right through. At least the broken ends are together and the leg's straight. Hand 
me some dressings and wide tape." 

"Never mind that. You still got your filo poncho?" 

She was taken aback. "Of course ... You think we'd do better making a run for it, 
rather than trying to get down the shaft?" 

"You'll do the running, hauling the prisoners. I'm going nowhere. Get Schneider 
loaded onto the tote on top of my guy. Cut up my poncho, wrap 'em as well as you can, 
and make tracks for the tuqo." 

"But—" 

"That's an order, Lieutenant!" 

"The tote will carry three people," she protested. 

"One poncho can't possibly conceal us all!" I bawled furiously. "Now move your 
goddamn ass! The Squeaks will turn their big guns on this platform as soon as they finish 
trashing the building." 

Insubordinate mutterings, which I ignored. She began bundling up Schneider and 


Matsukawa head to feet, with the healthier duty officer relegated to mattress status. I 
concentrated on bandaging my shin wound, for all the good it was going to do me, gave 
myself several doses of antibiotic and painkiller, and splinted my entire leg with the 
useless grenade launcher. 

"Give me a hand," I asked Ildy when I'd finished. "I'm gonna try hobbling off into the 
sunset at an angle from you guys. To hell with sitting here waiting for it." 

She complied. "I'll give another shout to Chispa on the lasercom when I'm in the 
clear. And I want to say it's been a real honor to serve with you ... even if you are a 
cowboy asshole." 

"Feeling's mutual, bull-dagger babe. Now move out!" 

She took up the tote handle and turned to go, just as a blast of coherent emerald light 
struck the platform. The canted structure gave a hideous squall and slowly began to 
topple. 

I hardly knew what hit me. Then I realized it was Ildiko, virtually invisible in her 
poncho, whisking around and delivering a vicious double stiff-arm to my middle back. I 
keeled over on top of the shimmering, packaged prisoners. Bits of junk rained down as 
two more cannon shots hit the platform with thunderclap detonations. It went 
skreeeaawrooom! 

We moved. I clung to Ollie Schneider's hooded head, past caring whether the 
bastard's neck got broken in the process. Lying on my stomach, my vision impeded by 
the helmet, I wasn't expecting the final stunning crash of collapsed cera-malloy, 
punctuated by a cannonade of green flame. 

The concussion knocked Ildiko off her feet. At least, I saw her boots go flying. The 
tote had enough residual momentum to bang into her before stopping in midair, causing 
me to release my grip on Ollie and flop onto the hard hopper pad. The crumpling 
platform had missed us by less than three meters, and we were enveloped in smoke and 
dust. 

I heard Ildy's voice murmuring something in rapid Hungarian that sounded like a 
prayer. My own final words were going to be more profane. Flat on my back, I looked at 
the sky through the power visor and cussed out the three klutzy looking little alien 
gunships, still hanging high above us like a trio of malformed vultures. What were they 
waiting for? One more blast would finish us. 

Instead there were three bright flashes, one after the other. Three monstrous 
explosions reached us an instant later. The Qastt were gone, obliterated. 

"Look!" Ildy said in an awed voice. She was on her knees with her hood pushed back. 
"Here comes the gig." 

But she was wrong about the identity of our rescuer. Descending serenely through 
murky chaos came the elegant, dangerous shape of Chispa Dos herself. 

 

 

Chapter 11 

 

"Cut it a little fine, didn't you?" I groused to Mimo. 

He helped me up the ramp into the starship. My leg was numb and well-braced and I 
could stump along on it fairly well. I felt weird and woozy. Ildy had already gone aboard 
under her own steam after Ivor Jenkins took charge of the two prisoners. 


Mimo said, "Sorry we took so long. It was necessary for us to dispose of a rather 
large Haluk cruiser before arranging your deliverance. I handled the guns myself. It was a 
nasty surprise. The bandit appeared unexpectedly as we were escorting Ba-Karkar's 
privateer through the outer reaches of the Dagasatt solar system." 

"Is the little pipsqueak okay?" I asked anxiously. 

"Don't worry. He's fine. We sent all of the pirates and the captured Qastt search-and-
rescue team to Cravat in the privateer. They were shepherded by a Rampart Fleet 
Security cutter that arrived too late to join in the fight against the Haluk." 

The hatch rolled shut behind us and I felt the vibration of liftoff underfoot. 

"Mimo, wait! We should search the rubble of the facility. Some important evidence 
might still be intact." 

"No, amigo, we can't stay. A foolhardy Qastt corvette also challenged us as we 
approached the planet. Fortunately, it recognized that Chispa was too formidable an 
opponent and backed off—but not before warning us that more armed Haluk starships are 
on the way here from Artiuk and Orukavuk. Their mission is to ensure that all putrid 
untranslatable human invaders are expelled from Dagasatt." 

Mimo urged me aft, toward the ship's well-equipped sick bay. I caught a glimpse of 
the sky outside the ports, which darkened almost instantly. Joe Betancourt had Chispa 
outward bound at illegal exit velocity, no doubt shattering the tranquillity of the Great 
Bitumen Desert with a horrific sonic boom. In an instant the ports shone with a weirdly 
rippling curtain of dazzling red and green. I cringed. Joe had accelerated to maximum 
sublight drive while we were still in the upper atmosphere and set off an ionic 
conflagration. 

Dagasatt was going to pay a price for having harbored a clandestine demiclone 
facility: our electromagnetic pulse had just fried most of the high-tech circuitry on the 
planet. I wondered if the Qastt would send the Haluk a bill. 

Mimo continued. "There's nothing more we can do here. Chispa will be on Cravat in 
less than an hour. Zone Patrol will deal with the hostile Haluk starships if they dare to 
follow us, but I think there's small danger of that." 

Dagasatt's sun was shrinking to a golden spark. I staggered, momentarily blinded as 
we made the ultraluminal crossover. When my vision cleared, Dagasatt was lost among 
the stretched stars. 

I said, "Nothing more to do." 

My eyes unaccountably filled with burning tears. When I lifted a hand to wipe them 
away I encountered the hard, slick visor of my combat helmet. A growling sob came 
from my throat and echoed in my headphones. I drew away from Mimo's supporting arm 
and stood in the middle of the corridor, swaying. With a violent motion I pulled the 
helmet off and let it fall to the deck with a muted clang. 

An overwhelming surge of irrational anger suddenly engulfed me and I wallowed in 
it, uttering incoherent obscenities at the same time that I realized I must be spacing out 
from battle fatigue, delayed shock, and the slew of drugs I'd taken. 

"Helly, it's all right! Operation Q is over. A success. It's time to move on." Mimo 
tried to put his guiding arm around me again, but I stumbled away. He took something 
from his pocket and spoke into it. 

"Damn straight Operation Q is over." My voice was even but too loud. "A great 
success—if you don't count Zorik O'Toole, who got burned alive, and the two hundred 


anonymous human demiclone donors who were blown to bits, to say nothing of a crowd 
of opposition noncombatants that I killed in cold blood, right or wrong. But why worry 
about them? Hell—we got Ollie Schneider, we got a second witness who might be even 
more valuable, and we got away! Success! I should be ready to move on." 

"Helly—" 

"But moving on means I have to start fighting all over again. In the Orion Arm, on the 
planet Earth, in Simon's turf. And I'm so goddamned tired, Mimo." 

The old man's grip barely kept me from falling. "Of course you're tired, and suffering 
from post-traumatic stress as well. You must rest and heal before thinking about what to 
do next. Meanwhile, trust your friends to carry on your fight." 

"Friends. .. ?" 

"I'll take him," Ivor Jenkins said. I felt myself lifted in herculean arms, an oddly 
familiar thing, and carried away. 

So tired. Pop. 

Time for bed, little buckaroo. 

"Leave everything to us," the fading voice said. "Matt Gre-goire is waiting on Cravat 
with portable psychotronic equipment. She was so confident you'd succeed on Dagasatt 
that she left Seriphos a day after we did, so no time would be wasted." 

"Confident?" I forced my leaden eyelids open again. "But I thought she'd washed her 
hands of me and Operation Q." 

Ivor said, "Matt's coming to Earth with us, Helly. She's a witness for the prosecution, 
too." 

"Well, what d'you know..." 

No morejabberin 'now, boy. Good night. 

Goodnight, Pop. 

My eyes closed and I slept. 

 

Calm. Competence. Courage. 

The message had been all the more terrifying for its banality—an ordinary vidphone 
call to his Rampart Tower office in Toronto, fielded by his secretary and duly transmitted 
to his desk: The concierge of the Arizona Biltmore informs Citizen Frost that "the 
meeting" will take place at 1630 hours, local time, in the Lobby Lounge of the resort. 

Only one person would dare to summon him in such a cavalier fashion. So off he 
goes again in supine response to his master's command-—only this time traveling in the 
opposite direction—at a loss to know why Alistair Drummond requires another vis-a-vis 
meeting immediately. And in Phoenix, Arizona, of all places. 

Surely he can't have found out about the presentation of Rampart's venture credit 
prospectus... 

No. Not even Galapharma's spy network extends into the executive offices of 
Macrodur Concern, the computer software colossus, and most powerful of the Big Seven. 
The audacious scheme hatched by Eve is still confidential and will remain so. Unless, 
against all odds, it succeeds—perhaps because Macrodur's chairman, that zany, self-
righteous prick, equates a Rampart bailout with flipping Gala the finger. 

If only there had been some way to subvert Eve's plan! He'd done his utmost to shoot 
it down before it ever reached the prospectus stage, but to no avail. In the end she and 
Simon backed him into a corner, ordering him to make the presentation this afternoon 


along with them and Gunter Eckert, or give a damned good reason for refusing. 

He did as he was told. 

Calmly. Competently. Courageously. 

The mantra loops in his brain as he leaves the taxi and enters the magnificent lobby of 
the historic resort, which reflects the architectural influence of Frank Lloyd Wright. The 
Arizona Biltmore is sparsely inhabited now in the height of the desert summer. Squaw 
Peak is framed in one of the outlooks. Late afternoon sunshine, partially muted by the 
climate-moderating Phoenix Conurbation force-field, illuminates stained-glass skylights, 
pilasters of fanciful wrought iron, and the famous patterned concrete blocks that form the 
walls. Southwestern pottery and arrangements of tropical flowers are everywhere. 

He crosses to the lounge, where a few drinkers in expensive casual attire sip colorful 
potations and converse in low, well-bred tones. 

He has arrived precisely on time and is gratified to discover that Alistair Drummond 
is not yet here. He sits down at a small table as far away from the other people as 
possible, beckons the waiter, and orders a Long Island iced tea. It quenches his thirst 
nicely and he impulsively signals for another, feeling his tension easing. And no wonder, 
since the innocuous-tasting tall drink contains full shots of vodka, rum, gin, and tequila. 

Just as the refill arrives, the Galapharma CEO strides into the lounge and plumps 
down at the table without a word of greeting. 

"May I bring you something, also, sir?" the server inquires. 

"Whatever my friend is having," says Alistair Drummond. He is wearing a white Izod 
tennis shirt and shorts with a cotton sweater knotted loosely around his neck. The leonine 
hair is disarranged, the hard, handsome face is flushed and gleaming, and he exudes a 
powerful odor of sweat, apparently not giving a damn whether his companion might be 
offended. 

"Katje Vanderpost," Drummond says in a mild, baleful voice. "Have you brought her 
around to our way of thinking, lad?" 

"I've done some forceful persuading," he temporizes, "painting you as a remorseless 
hard-charger who'll have his way by fair means or foul. On the surface, she seems as 
stubborn as ever. But she's got to be a very frightened and demoralized old woman by 
now, ready to accede to my demands." 

Drummond's voice is almost inaudible. "You're lying. You've been afraid to tackle 
Katje, hoping she'd die before the next board meeting and solve your problem for you. I 
warned you about lying to me ..." 

"Your spies have it wrong this time, Alistair." He forces a smile, plucks the straw 
from his second cocktail, discards it, and swallows a long, fortifying belt. "Why, I called 
her just the day before yesterday to offer my condolences on Asa's death. She was in a 
pitiful state, barely coherent—" 

"Asahel Frost is alive. I wouldn't be surprised if his mother knows it." 

Stunned to the depths of his being, he can say nothing. 

"Furthermore, he mounted a massive attack on the secret facility in the Perseus Spur 
where Oliver Schneider was confined. This happened less than ten hours ago. Schneider 
was either killed or taken into custody by the attackers. If he's dead, we have 
approximately one week before damning evidence against Galapharma is made public by 
his solicitors, according to a prearranged scheme. If Schneider's alive, I think we may 
assume that Asahel Frost will bring him to Earth in the fastest starship at his disposal—


one stolen from Galapharma. Even with refueling stops, the ship will arrive in eight days. 
They'll need another day or two to prepare the formal depositions for the civil suit and 
present them to the Commerce Secretariat and the Commonwealth Judiciary Tribunal. 
But after that..." 

"Oh, Jesus," he whispers. 

Alistair Drummond leans across the table, so close that every pore and drop of 
perspiration on his face is visible. "Our previous timetable is nullified. Both of us will 
have to act immediately if we're to salvage the situation. You will arrange for an 
emergency meeting of the Rampart Board of Directors within one week." 

"But that will require Simon's approval, unless—" 

"Do it!" Drummond says. "Before the week is up, you will coerce Katje Vanderpost 
into giving you her voting proxy. Or else bring her will to the board meeting, along with 
the proxies of those charity groups who inherit her quarterstake. Get on with it, you 
gutless sack of pigshit! You've vacillated long enough." 

He sits frozen. It's come, the eventuality he has feared ever since the earlier meeting 
with Drummond. Katje will never hand over her proxy to him. He knows this, and he has 
already laid the groundwork for the alternative course of action. She is well-guarded, but 
the action will succeed because of its utter simplicity. There is not the remotest chance 
that he will be implicated. 

It will be a merciful release for the sick old woman. A good thing, in so many ways. 

"Her will," the Galapharma CEO repeats with implacable gentleness. "Ready for 
expedited probate. The Rampart board must vote to accept my tender before Schneider's 
evidence is officially submitted to ICS and the prosecutors or I'll be destroyed. And you'll 
go to Coventry Blue." 

His reply is spoken judiciously, without emotion. "There's no reason for either of us 
to be concerned. I've made very careful arrangements. All I have to do is give the word ... 
It'll be done." 

The trusted housekeeper and confidant of the old lady has a ne'er-do-well grandson, a 
young unmarried priest in Albuquerque with divergent sexual appetites. To save him 
from exposure and disgrace, the housekeeper has agreed to substitute a particular tea 
bag—when given the order—for the innocuous chamomile infusion Katje always uses as 
a sleep aid. The simpleminded housekeeper believes that the bogus beverage will merely 
make stubborn Katje "more amenable" to certain crucial matters of business. 

Tonight, he will give the order. Katje will take her final cup of chamomile. 

He and Alistair Drummond sit together in silence until the server arrives with 
Drummond's drink. The Galapharma CEO accepts with gracious thanks and takes a long 
pull. 

"That's delicious," he tells the waiter. "What d'you call it?" 

"Long Island iced tea, sir. But there's no tea in it at all." 

"No tea? Amazing! You could have fooled me." 

"The flavor's deceptive. So's the alcoholic content." 

Drummond laughs. "Deceptive, eh? Then I'll have to watch my step, won't I?" He 
nods at the man across the table. "So will my friend. His glass is nearly empty. Please 
bring him another." 

"Whatever you say, sir," says the server. 

"Damn right," murmurs Alistair Drummond. 


Cravat is a medium-sized, borderline S-2 world. Humans can survive there without 
full life support, providing that they endure nineteen inoculations, aren't persnickety 
about being munched upon by small carnivorous life-forms, and are agile enough to 
avoid the large ones. Smart visitors wear Class Two envirogear while strolling, and carry 
high-powered weapons. 

Cravat is Rampart's most remote colony, and it harbors no Indigenous Sapients. 
Poisonously lush vegetation clothes most of its small continents, which yield enough 
valuable minerals and biological agents to make the place economically attractive to 
entrepreneurs. The planet is also the sole source of the obscure genen vector PD32:C2, a 
broad-spectrum transferase agent that finds a modest market among human terraformers. 
In recent years increasing quantities of PD32:C2 have been purchased from Rampart by 
Galapharma AC, mystifying the Rampart sales force. 

The only permanent settlement on Cravat, forthrightly called Dome, is tucked under a 
full DF-1500 hemispherical force-field like a model village protected by a bell jar. 
Rampart personnel stationed there do not consider it a hardship posting. The Starcorp, 
following my late Uncle Ethan's dictum—"The lousier the workplace, the spiffier the 
employee accommodations and perks"—has made Dome a beautiful and lavishly 
appointed oasis in the midst of what its human denizens fondly call the Green Hell. 

I can testify to its diabolical charms through personal experience. 

Cravat's hospital is small but well-equipped. Its medics took about an hour to heal my 
broken leg with bonebrace, leaving it as good as new structurally and assuring me that the 
pain would go away in a couple of weeks. My mental discom-bobulations received 
pharmaceutical therapy, since I needed to remain compos mentis for a few hours more. I 
was warned to take it easy now, and catch up on my considerable sleep debt during the 
voyage to Earth unless I wanted to risk going bonkers. 

While I was being pasted back together, Matt Gregoire supervised the care of the two 
star witnesses. Jim Matsukawa had a smashed nose and other minor contusions suffered 
as a result of being bottom layer in the antigrav tote sandwich during the final exciting 
minutes on Dagasatt. He was otherwise unhurt. Oliver Schneider's injuries required more 
extensive treatment, but he was going to be reasonably fit in short order. Matt placed the 
prisoners under heavy guard, then went to the Fleet Security office to file some slightly 
fictitious reports to Zone Patrol concerning recent activities on and around Dagasatt. 

Ildiko, Ivor, Joe, and the gaggle of Qastt who had been escorted to Cravat ahead of 
us, not being in need of hospi-talization, retired to Dome's luxurious spa to refresh 
themselves. (I was informed that the Squeakers demanded, and got, bubble baths.) By the 
time I joined them in the spa's restaurant, everyone was groomed, garbed, and gobbling 
quantities of expensive food and drink—the Qastt at one table and the humans at 
another—all hardship and danger apparently forgotten. 

During a lull in the carousing, I dealt each of my three human companions a niobium 
EFT card primed with the agreed-upon stipend, plus a sizable bonus. 

Joe Betancourt cleared his throat, looking slightly abashed. "What will happen to 
O'Toole's share? Since he had no family, maybe you might consider—" 

Before Joe could continue, Ildy broke in. "I'd like to suggest that his pay be donated 
to the Zone Patrol Benevolent Association in Zorik's name. It's a charity for the survivors 
of personnel killed on duty." 

"Great idea," I said. "I'll see to it myself." Then I asked if anyone was interested in 


signing on for a second tour in Cap'n Kelly's Irregulars, accompanying me and Mimo and 
Matt and the prisoners to Earth in Chispa Dos. 

"You know you can count me in," said Ildy. 

"I'd go just for the fun of it!" Ivor declared blithely. 

"It might not be so amusing if the Haluk try to ambush us," I said. "And by now, 
Galapharma must know that the Dagasatt raiders—namely us—have their stolen Y700. 
They'll be watching for its signature. Our trip might be rocky, even if we're riding the 
fastest boat in the galaxy. Or we might have a pleasure cruise. It's a toss-up." 

Joe said, "I'd like to reenlist, Helly, but... what kind of fee are we talking about?" 

"The same as Dagasatt. For everyone." 

"That's very generous. I'm on." 

I rose from the table. "You guys finish your meal. I have some business to take care 
of. Remember, we meet in the Port Traffic Manager's office in two hours. You want to 
buy any more new clothes or other stuff for the trip, better get a move on." 

The nine Qastt, who were all wearing translators, had been seated at a table in the 
quietest corner. In lieu of Squeak food, they were supping on the least putrid human 
groceries available: dandelion salad with Angostura bitters, grilled black pudding, squid 
fritters, kim chee, Icelandic hrokkbraud and Marmite, Bananas Foster, and a big pitcher 
of scorpion cocktails made with Demerara rum. 

I told the aliens they could remain in the spa for three more days at Rampart expense 
and run a tab up to five grand apiece at the Cravat Mall. This news provoked whispers of 
wild enthusiasm among all but one of the little people. 

"Where my bribe?" Ba-Karkar demanded baldly. 

I produced a card and handed it over. "Here you go, skipper. I'll trust you to give a 
suitable share to Tisqatt and Tu-Prak. And I strongly suggest that you go into another line 
of work." 

"I think about it," he muttered. 

Ogu neatly nipped the money card out of her husband's hand and tucked it into her 
draperies. "He think about it with significant intensity!" Tisqatt and Tu-Prak choked back 
giggles. 

The five abducted Qastt agents of mercy received a generous compensation for their 
unjust incarceration, together with paid passage on the privateer to Ba-Karkar's home 
planet, where they would be able to catch a transport back to Dagasatt. I advised them to 
exaggerate the horrors of their ordeal and say nothing about the under-the-table payoff. 
They agreed that the idea made significant sense, then toasted my good health with 
scorpions, human-style, and shook hands with themselves in the traditional Qastt fashion 
of indicating goodwill to all. 

Leaving the restaurant, I went to the spa's atrium in search of peace and quiet. I found 
an open area where the Cravat sun shone through the protective force-field onto planters 
brimming with petunias, roses, and geraniums, potted palm trees, a pretty little fountain, 
and a small manicured expanse of terrestrial grass with padded shiatsu lounges parked on 
it. Sinking gratefully into one and turning on the massage, I took out my phone and called 
Mimo. He had decided to pass up the spa to take care of the servicing and supplying of 
Chispa Dos for the first leg of the long Orion run. 

"Everything's going fine," he told me. "The starport maintenance crew are just putting 
the finishing touches on our new brig. It's comfortable and secure. All the special 


supplies have arrived and are being stowed. The servicing should be finished soon. I'm 
checking out the weaponry systems personally." 

I said, "Don't forget our little ceremony at the office of the Port Traffic Manager, 
Terence Hoy. You have two hours." 

He chuckled. "I wouldn't miss it for the world. Are you feeling better?" 

"All mended and ready to boogie," I prevaricated. Actually, I felt like the Black Death 
revisited. "I'm going to take a nap now so I'll be fresh for the festivities. Catch you later, 
mi capitan." 

I settled back, thinking idly of my first trip to Cravat, when the Port Traffic Manager 
had been a man named Robert Bas-combe. Poor Bob had died accidentally after I coerced 
him into helping me investigate Eve's kidnapping. Now, lying there in the sunshine, 
staring at the swaying palm fronds above my head, I suddenly remembered something 
Bob had said. A small slip of the tongue, perhaps quite meaningless. But it was worth 
checking out. 

I got Terence Hoy on the phone. "Asahel Frost here. Just a brief question about your 
late predecessor, Robert Bas-combe. He had a wife named Delphine. Does she still live in 
Dome?" 

"Why, yes. Del LaMotte. She's an analytical chemist at our Flutterbug One facility." 

I asked for, and got, her phone code. When I reached LaMotte at work and identified 
myself, her voice grew instantly cooler. I apologized for her loss and then asked my 
question. 

She said, "I don't really remember, Citizen Frost. Bob was always inviting people 
from Central for the big game hunting, but none of the VIPs stayed with us in our home." 

"I understand. But perhaps your husband mentioned a visit by either man to you in 
passing. They would have wanted their presence on Cravat kept very confidential. Please 
think carefully. This is no idle query, Citizen LaMotte. It might even be crucial to 
Rampart's survival." 

There was a silence. Then she said, "Only one of them ever came here that I know of. 
It happened about seven months before your sister's disappearance. I found out only by 
accident when I overheard Bob speaking on the SS com. He became very upset with me. 
I was told to forget all about the matter, and I tried my best to do so." 

"Who was the confidential visitor?" 

She told me. 

I thanked her, turned off the phone, and lay there thinking. Was it a damning clue or 
just a useless bit of trivia? He might have come to Cravat for any number of reasons—not 
necessarily to meet Elgar/McGrath and inspect the secret Haluk facility. 

Not necessarily to plot my death and Eve's destruction. 

The atrium smelled of new-mown grass and roses. A soft artificial breeze was 
blowing. The fountain splashed, palms rattled, and recorded birdsong trilled gently. In 
spite of the thoughts tumbling about in my fatigued brain, I felt my eyes closing. I slept—
and dreamed of him, worse luck. 

After a delay that seems interminable, the call to Earth goes through and a man with a 
long freckled face and auburn hair appears on the com display. 

"Who the devil are you," he barks, "and how did you get this number?" 

"Your Artiuk associate gave it to me and told me to report. Are you Tyler Baldwin, 
Galapharma's head of security?" 


"Ah... Yes, of course. I'm Baldwin. Sorry to be so abrupt. We're in the midst of a 
major shitstorm here. Is Oliver Schneider still alive?" 

"Yes. But no thanks to your stupid Squeaker allies. Their gunships almost nailed him 
during the big blowup on Dag. He was badly injured." 

"It was a mistake. The Qastt were ordered only to destroy the facility, not fire on 
persons outside. I presume Schneider will recover?" 

"He's in the Cravat hospital. They say he'll be okay. Speaking of mistakes, what the 
fuck was that big Haluk cruiser doing, lying in wait among the Dag asteroids? It nearly 
creamed us!" 

"A failure of communication," Baldwin says dismissively. "These things happen. 
When will Asahel Frost leave Cravat?" 

"Soon. Maybe three or four hours. He had to be patched up, along with Schneider and 
the Galapharma officer who was taken prisoner." 

Consternation floods Tyler Baldwin's face. "What officer?" 

"Oh. I forgot to mention that Frost brought out the D.O. at the Haluk facility. A man 
named Jim Matsukawa." 

"Matsukawa! What does Frost plan to do with him?" 

"Take him to Earth along with Schneider. As a material witness to the illegal activity 
on Dagasatt, I suppose. They'll both be interrogated psychotronically. Matilde Gregoire 
showed up on Cravat with portable probe machines. She's making the trip, too." 

"You must find a way to prevent Matsukawa's interrogation— but without harming 
him. This is absolutory imperative." 

"Are you out of your tiny mind? How am I supposed to do that? There's no way I can 
get at the psychotronic equipment to sabotage it. Frost and Gregoire have locked it in the 
wardroom where they plan to do the probing." 

"You'll have to think of something," the Galapharma security chief says with harsh 
urgency. "We can't allow Matsukawa to be questioned." 

"But what difference does it make? You'll get both prisoners back when I—" 

"This is an order!" 

"What about Ollie Schneider? Do I have to muzzle him, too?" 

"It's not necessary. But Matsukawa must not be probed!" 

"Well... I suppose I could try to take him out with food poisoning. You can pick up a 
lethal bug culture on Cravat just by wiping a Kleenex on the starport tarmac. If I can 
smuggle it through the decon gate—" 

"I don't want the man dead, you bloody fool! Only unable to respond to the 
psychotronic machines. He must not be harmed in any way!" 

"This wasn't part of our original deal." 

"If you fail, not only is the deal null and void, but so are you." 

"That's a terrific incentive." 

"Don't take that tone with me. You made the choice to betray your comrades. And 
don't think you can skip out with what we've already paid you. We'll track your ass to 
Andromeda and points west." Abruptly, Baldwin's voice moderates, becomes persuasive. 
"I know it'll be a tough job. They'll guard the prisoners like the Crown Jewels. But find a 
way and Galapharma will triple the sum originally agreed upon." 

"Triple! ... Wait a minute. I just remembered something. A trick human pirates 
sometimes used to botch up our interrogations. It could work. Matsukawa will be puking 


like a pig and feel pretty bad, but he'll survive." 

"Explain." 

The bizarre expedient is described. "Trust me. It'll work. But you listen to me, 
Baldwin: I want the extra pay right now, while I'm on the com and able to verify. This is 
non-negotiable. And the same precautions apply as in your man's original arrangement 
with me." 

"Agreed." 

"You'd better tell me how you want to arrange the handover of the prisoners." 

"That hasn't yet been decided. We'll be tracking you closely on your way to Earth. 
Perhaps you might seize control of the ship at one of the more remote fueling stops." 

"Just like that!" 

"When you've done the job, a broadband summons will bring us to you in short 
order." 

"What's wrong with you setting up an ambush? Gala-pharma running short of heavy 
cruisers?" 

"The Y700 could easily outmaneuver them ... if it were flown by a competent pilot. 
And we can't risk the lives of the prisoners in a firefight. Find another way. Earn your 
excessively generous pay." 

"All right. But Gala better be playing straight with me. I'm warning you, Baldwin. I 
know how to take care of myself." 

"Take good care of Jim Matsukawa, my friend, and you'll find out just how generous 
Galapharma can be." 

I slept among the roses and palm trees for fifty whole minutes before my phone 
buzzed. 

"Yes." 

"It's Matt. I have Karl Nazarian on the subspace com. I think you should talk to him." 

The anxious sound of her voice was like an ice cube down my collar. I sat bolt 
upright. 

"Is it bad news?" I demanded. 

"Plomazo was attacked about half an hour ago. Karl and the others are all right. 
They're heading for Torngat Starport for minor repairs." 

"Shit! ... Torngat's about five thousand lights from here, isn't it?" 

"Five thousand four hundred twenty-two," she said. 

"Where are you?" 

"The Port Authority building, on the Ring Promenade right next to the starport 
terminal." 

"I'm on my way." 

The spa's concierge knew all about me and my VIP associates. When I asked her for 
speedy transport, she volunteered to take me herself. But Cravat Dome was so small that 
the only personal ground vehicles were modified go-carts with a top speed of 15 kph. We 
rolled sedately to the opposite side of town while I ground my teeth in frustration. The 
Ring Promenade was a cantilevered floating mezzanine thirty meters above ground level 
that harbored small shops and office strips, interspersed with living greenery that 
cascaded over the parapet edge like the Hanging Gardens of Babylon. Matt was waiting 
for me at the Port Authority entrance as we rolled up the ramp. I thanked the concierge 
and hopped out. 


"This way." She hurried off with me struggling to keep up with her. My freshly 
repaired leg ached like a sonuvabitch. 

The last time I'd seen Matt Gregoire had been a fleeting, unfocused glimpse in 
Cravat's hospital, just before the medics hauled me away for repairs. She'd been euphoric 
then, sharing the Dagasatt triumph. Now the onyx-black eyes were somber and her 
cinnamon skin seemed pale. We didn't speak again until we reached the communication 
rooms. 

She eyeballed the scanner on a locked room labeled DEDICATED COM—RESTRICTED 
ACCESS. The door rolled open to admit us. Inside was a bank of open-beam subspace 
transceivers connecting Cravat to Rampart Central on Seriphos, Fleet Security HQ on 
Tyrins, the Starcorp offices in Toronto, and each of the four Zone Patrol posts serving the 
Perseus Spur. No employees were on duty. They'd probably been cleared out on orders 
from Madame Vice President. 

Matt sat at the com unit hooked to Seriphos, which was relaying the signal from Karl. 
I pulled up a chair as Nazarian's weathered face came onto the display. 

He said, "Helly. Congrats on the Dagasatt caper. Matt told me about it. I'm sorry to 
rain on your parade." 

"What happened?" 

"The time-frame is important. Today at 0720 Zebra Plo-mazo was attacked by three 
light-cruiser-class starships." He gave the ship's coordinates at the time of engagement. 
"The aggressor vessels were of human manufacture, highly modified DAS-4 types a 
couple of rungs below our Y660 in assault capability. They made no attempt to 
communicate, just popped out of a dust cloud and started zapping. I, um, blew the crap 
out of them, but it was a close call. There were no aggressor survivors." 

"Matt said you sustained damage." 

"A minor hull breach. Hector says we're in no immediate danger. We're limping to 
Torngat, twenty lights distant, for a fix." 

"That's not a Sheltok world, is it?" The big energy Concern owned most of the major 
starship fueling and maintenance stations in the Orion Arm. Since Sheltok was an ally of 
Galapharma, I wasn't anxious to do business with it. I'd already instructed Mimo to plot 
Chispa's course using freesoil pit stops, even though the routing was less direct and a lot 
more expensive than following conventional shipping lanes. 

"Torngat belongs to Macrodur. It's a winter resort world serving Sector Six. I think 
we'll be reasonably secure there... for a little while." 

I caught his drift. "Right. We'll have to pick you guys up. We can be on Torngat in a 
little over three days. Our Y700 is big enough to carry everybody." 

The old security man pulled a wry face. "Depends on who you include in the 
'everybody' bag! Matt told me about your Operation Q crew. I think it's possible that one 
of them tipped off Galapharma to Plomazo's course. And pretty damn recently at that, or 
we'd have been hit earlier along the route. There aren't that many private Y660s riding the 
void. It would have been easy to track us if the bad guys had a sizable observer net—like 
Gala—and knew what to look for." 

"Christ! You could be right. But... I don't see how it could have happened. You surely 
can't suspect Mimo or Ivor of selling us out. And the new crew members signed on after 
you guys left. Maybe your bandits were real bandits after all." 

"Plomazo's too fast and well-armed to attract conventional pirates, even in triplicate. 


And there was no summons from the hostiles demanding surrender. They came at us with 
lethal intent." 

Matt said, "The leak couldn't possibly have come from my Rampart Central office or 
the Seriphos starport crew. I made certain that the only people who knew that Plomazo 
carried Garth Wing Lee were personnel who had been vetted in duress for loyalty." 

"I'll vouch for Lotte, Hector, and Cassius with my life," Karl stated. "My people are 
loyal." 

"That leaves me and my folks, doesn't it?" I said dispiritedly. 

"Seems so," said Karl. "Unless we had stone bad luck on one of our earlier fueling 
stops, and some informant told Gala security that Plomazo was passing through. We 
altered her ID, not that it helps much with such a distinctive boat. Drummond's spooks 
know Mimo's your good buddy. They might have put out an early APB on a Y660 
starship, thinking you might be aboard, along with Lee." 

"It could have happened that way," Matt said. 

"I'm supposed to be dead," I reminded them. 

"You've been resurrected before," Matt observed. "But I'm more inclined to believe 
the stool pigeon scenario. A fairly recent tipoff." 

I shook my head. "It doesn't seem possible, after all my crew and I went through 
together." 

"But you can't discount the possibility," Matt said. "Who else besides Mimo knew 
you were shipping Lee to Earth?" 

I tried to remember. "Meem and I discussed the matter casually on the flight to 
Nogawa. We were wondering what Lotte Dietrich was going to find in the data-dump 
she'd taken from Garth Lee's ship—" 

"She found a lot," Karl broke in. "But it'll keep. Go on, Helly." 

"Um. We were in the dining saloon, drinking coffee after a meal. Ivor was clearing 
the table. The new crew members had already finished eating and were gone." 

"So Ivor could have overheard you," Matt said. 

I blew up. "It's ridiculous to think he'd betray us!" 

"Calm down," Karl said from the SS com. "The boy might not have realized that the 
information was sensitive. He could have passed it along innocently to one of the others." 

"I'll check with him." Matt pulled out her pocket phone, tapped up a code and spoke. 
"This is Matt Gregoire. Where are you? ... Good. Do you recall any conversations with 
Helly or Mimo during Operation Q where Plomazo's mission to Earth was mentioned? In 
connection with Karl transporting a man named Garth Wing Lee? ... Did you ever discuss 
the matter with members of the new crew? This is really important, Ivor... Okay. 
Thanks." 

She cut off and said to me, "He remembers the messroom discussion. He swears he 
never passed on the information to anyone." 

"I believe him," I said. "The leak—if there was one—must have come through me, 
but I'm damned if I can think how. Rats! I feel like a total schlump." 

"The attack on Plomazo could have been a fluke. A piece of incredibly bad luck, just 
as Karl said." 

"We'll go ahead on that assumption. For now, at any rate." 

"You're the boss." Matt turned back to the SS com and spoke briskly to Karl. "Keep a 
close guard on Lee. There's an especially important question we failed to ask him during 


his psychoprobe session back on Seriphos. Helly and I will get back to you in a day or 
two, after we sort things out." 

He nodded and ended the transmission. 

"Important question?" I inquired dopily. 

"Whether Lee himself is a Haluk demiclone." 

She nodded in humiliating agreement. "The most obvious suspects are Ildiko Szabo 
and Joe Betancourt, but I'm at a loss to know how either of them could be long-term Gala 
agents. I picked them out of a hat when you asked me to find recruits for the operation. If 
either one defected to Gala, it 

must have been a spur of the moment decision, done for money." 

"What are we going to do, Matt?" In the state I was in, I hardly had a clue. 

"There's always psychoprobing." 

"Aw, geez. Scramble my friends' brains on a fishing expedition? I can't do it, babe." 

"Then we simply leave the two of them behind." 

"Ildy saved my goddamn life on Dagasatt. She wants to see her folks back on Earth 
and I promised to bring her along. And Joe took out the Haluk ship that could have sunk 
our whole operation. He really needs money to start his charter operation, and we need 
another pilot to spell Mimo and me on the trip." 

She thought about it. "If we secure the ship's SS com from everyone except you and 
me and Mimo, lock up the portable weapons, and do a buddy system arrangement with 
the crew to forestall crude forms of sabotage, we might be okay. If there is a Gala agent 
on board, he or she will have to be circumspect to avoid giving the show away—to say 
nothing of self-endangerment. Our traitor wants to live to spend the loot." 

"Let's be up-front with everyone about the possibility of a spy being among us. If 
nothing else, it'll put the fink on notice." I looked at my wrist chronograph. "It's time for 
our little melodrama with Terence Hoy. And then we're out of here." 

Ollie and Jim, looking crestfallen and accompanied by Fleet Security guards, were 
waiting in the anteroom when we all trooped past them into Hoy's office. The Port Traffic 
Manager, who was the de facto governor of Cravat, seemed nearly as uncomfortable as 
the prisoners. Matt had already warned him what was going to happen, explaining that it 
was a legal necessity so Rampart could plausibly deny having invaded Dagasatt. 

It was plain to see that Terence Hoy fervently wished that the legal necessity was 
happening on someone else's planet. 

 

Matt instructed the guards to wait outside for a while with the prisoners, then closed 
the door and checked to make sure that the props were there: a tall folding floorscreen, a 
vocal distortion device, and a bulky armored combat glove. She herself had brought 
along a zipped carrier bag that clinked. 

Mimo, Ivor, Ildiko, and Joe stood behind the desk with Terence, witnesses to the 
upcoming proceedings. Matt stood in front. I hid behind the screen, which was set up at 
the left, arranged so the person in back of it couldn't be caught on the room's holovid 
recorder or seen by others in the room. I selected an artificial voice from the device 
menu, put the glove on, and said, "Testing, one-two!" 

I sounded like Donald Duck, but nobody laughed. 

"Very well," Matt said. "Terence, please activate the recorder." 


He touched a pad on the desk console and we were rolling. 

Matt faced the holocam, identified herself, announced the time, date, and place, and 
named those present. The last individual mentioned was one Geronimo, disenfranchised 
person and bounty hunter. 

I stuck my gloved hand out from behind the screen and waggled my fingers in 
greeting. 

"Mr. Geronimo," Matt said, "your desire to remain anonymous is understood and 
respected. Why have you met with us today?" 

"I'm here," said the duck, "to formally offer to Rampart Star-corp the persons of two 
suspected felons—Oliver Schneider and James Matsukawa—apprehended by me 
pursuant to CHW Criminal Statute 22, Clause 743 A." 

"What is your fee?" Matt asked. 

"One dollar and other good and valuable considerations." 

I stuck out my gloved hand, and she put the coin into it. Then she opened the outer 
door and summoned Ollie and Jim and their guards. 

"Are these men the ones you apprehended?" 

"They are," I quacked from my hiding place. Schneider did a double take. Matsukawa 
stayed deadpan. 

"Thank you for services rendered, Mr. Geronimo. I accept delivery of Schneider and 
Matsukawa in the name of Rampart Starcorp. Guards, you may take the detainees back 
outside and wait with them there. And you, Mr. Geronimo, may also withdraw." 

She told Terence to shut off the holocam. When its red eye winked off and the door 
closed, I came out from behind the screen, ditched the glove and the voice disguiser, and 
stood meekly before the Vice President for Confidential Services. The camera was 
reactivated. 

"Are you the man sometimes known as Helmut Icicle," Matt asked me formally, 
"who knowingly misused a Rampart Red Card on the planet Nogawa-Krupp after your 
employment had been terminated by Rampart Interstellar Corporation?" 

I admitted it. She ordered me to surrender the card and levied a fine of one dollar. I 
returned her lucky buck and she pronounced my trespass forgiven. Then she gave me a 
new Red Card made out to Asahel Frost and announced that I was herewith rehired as 
Vice President for Special Projects, enfranchised and fully empowered to exercise all 
duties and offices of the alpha-level corporate position, including that of praefectus 
conlegius of the Commonwealth Judiciary. 

She then remanded to the custody of Asahel Frost the persons of Oliver Schneider 
and James Matsukawa, detainees suspected of committing multiple crimes against 
Rampart Interstellar Corporation and the Commonwealth of Human Worlds. I accepted 
responsibility for them, declaring that I would, as empowered by law, interrogate them 
sub duritia en route to Earth, and turn over psychotronic evidence deposed by them to 
prosecutors of the Commonwealth Judiciary Tribunal upon my arrival in Toronto. (I'd 
also transmit the depositions via SS com to Eve as soon as they were complete; but their 
final validation would be delayed until Matt and I were able to affirm them in person.) 

Matt thanked Terence Hoy and the other witnesses and declared the proceedings at an 
end. The camera was shut off. She made three copies of the holovid, gave one dime to 
Terence, one to me, and kept the third herself. 

Then she lifted the carrier bag onto the desk, unzipped it, and pulled out two bottles 


of Veuve Cliquot NV and a package of disposable glasses. Corks popped and we drank to 
Rampart's success and the confusion of her enemies. Mimo Bermudez offered expensive 
Cohiba Robusto cigars in plastic cylinders to those assembled. Mellowed by the 
champagne, Terence Hoy took two of the Cuban stogies, Ildiko Szabo took one, Joe 
Betancourt took three, and the rest of us passed. 

The necessary business being concluded, we said goodbye to the friendly folks of 
Cravat, collected the prisoners, climbed into Chispa, and set off for Earth at top ross 
pseudovelocity. 

 

 

Chapter 12 

 

I'd promised the doctor to rest in bed for at least two days before attempting any 
strenuous activity; psychoprobing prisoners fit the "strenuous" category in spades. But 
before 1 embarked for dreamland I contacted Eve on the subspace communicator to give 
her the news. 

To my surprise, I tracked her down in the Toronto offices of Rampart, working very 
late in the CEO suite. She was dressed in a summer outfit of silver and carnelian voile 
that included a smart suit, dress gloves, and an astounding cartwheel hat featuring a heap 
of silk daisies and an opaque veil that completely hid her features. 

My greeting consisted of, "Good God! You look like the Merry Widow." 

She laughed, removed the headgear and gloves, and tossed them onto the 
communication console. "I put them back on again when your call came through. I 
wanted you to enjoy the full effect of the ensemble. Conceals the mutation rather nicely, 
doesn't it? I was quite a sensation at Chanterelles when I dined with Gunter this evening... 
and even more of a smash at our meeting with the Macrodur Chairman and Chief 
Financial Officer this afternoon." 

"Macrodur! What the devil were you doing there?" 

"I'll explain it all after you've told me your news. Incidentally, I'm very happy to see 
you alive, Asa. I hope you'll let me inform the rest of the family about your survival. Poor 
Simon was crushed." 

"That'll be the day ... Ah, rats. You might as well tell the old buzzard that the prodigal 
son has risen from the dead. 

Better keep Dan and Beth in the dark for the time being. They're too tight with Zed, 
and I don't want him to know I'm on the prowl. Not just yet." I paused for dramatic effect. 
"Of course, Ollie Schneider's capture should remain top secret until we land in Toronto." 

"You nabbed him!" she exulted. "I knew you would." "Another overconfident female. 
The fact is, I nearly made a mess of it. But we won out, thanks to a gang of good people. 
Matt Gregoire and I will interrogate Schneider en route to Earth and transmit his 
deposition to you as soon as we can. He's agreed to testify freely in exchange for 
immunity. I'm beginning to think we should file the civil suit without delay. As soon as 
Ollie's deposition is validated." 

"We'll have to examine Schneider's raw evidence and get an opinion from Dan and 
the legal department, but I'm inclined to agree with you." 

"Have you talked to Ef Sontag yet about the Haluk threat?" She hesitated a moment 
before replying. "Just a preliminary conversation to alert him that we might submit 


something interesting. I—I thought we agreed that I'd wait for Karl to arrive with Garth 
Wing Lee before meeting Sontag." 

"Karl's going to be a little late." I told her about the attack on Plomazo and my 
decision to pick up the crew and Lee, balancing the bad news with the prospect that both 
Lee and Jim Matsukawa might turn out to be Haluk disguised as humans. "That would be 
marvelous luck if it's true," she said, sighing, "because we're out of luck with the Fake 
Emily demiclone. Her brother authorized a disinterment and I sent some of my trusted 
people to Yorkshire for the body, but the coffin was empty. I presume Gala's agents got 
there first." "Rats. What about the Haluk corpse at Tokyo U?" "We managed to get that—
along with a new copy of Professor Shibuya's research data confirming the presence of 
human DNA and eradication of the allomorphic trait. Your friend Beatrice Mangan is 
keeping the remains in a private mortuary in Fenelon Falls north of Toronto until we're 
ready to turn all of our Haluk threat evidence over to the Commonwealth Assembly. 
Xenoaffairs already has a copy of Shibuya's report on the body, but it's classified Cosmic 
and I didn't want to risk having some suborned SXA bureaucrat make it 'unavailable.' " 

"It's just what the bastards would do ... Now tell me what kind of rumpus you've been 
raising on the Rampart front, Madame CEO. Were you elected by acclamation?" 

"Of course! Cousin Zed almost suffered cardiac arrest when Simon renewed my 
nomination, but it did pass unanimously and was affirmed by stakeholder vote. After I 
told the board about my new venture credit scheme, Aunt Emma made an amazing little 
speech, saying how pleased Uncle Ethan would have been at my election." 

"Zed must have enjoyed that." 

"He sat there with absolutely no expression on his face, while his mother burbled on 
about how wonderful it was that / was willing to fight for her late husband's dream 
against all odds, while some others, unnamed, were willing to let it die. The rest of the 
board members were rather nonplussed. So was I, frankly! It was a Mouse That Roared 
situation. I almost felt sorry for Zed. Emma has always been so meek and willing to 
follow his lead." 

"It sounds like Katje's got at Emma and brainwashed her. Revolt of the Little Old 
Ladies!" 

"Emma may not stay brainwashed," Eve said. "She leans with the wind, and Zed's 
flying hurricane flags." 

"Was Katje at the meeting?" 

"No. Simon had her proxy. Do you think Mom used the same arguments on Aunt 
Emma that Pop used on her?" 

I laughed. "Why not? Converts are always the most fanatical missionaries. But never 
mind that. Tell me about your venture scheme." 

She explained it briefly, then told me how the prospectus had been submitted to 
Macrodur's financial arm, with the Concern's Chairman in attendance. I gave a low 
whistle of amazement. "Stanislawski met with you himself? That's wild! Did the 
Archnerd laugh in your faces and send you packing?" 

"Certainly not. I told you I'd been doing my homework. 

Adam Stanislawski has a long-standing personal animus toward Alistair Drummond. 
Mind you, there's small chance of the credit coming through unless Rampart is seen to be 
pulling its socks up." 

"Well, it would help if you guys discovered another rozkoz." 


I meant that as a joke, referring to the confection more delicious than chocolate that 
had founded the fortunes of Rampart Starcorp fifty years ago. 

But she said, "We've done that already, Asa. Only we failed to realize its true 
potential. I've done a lot of thinking since the last time we spoke, even revised some of 
my financial strategy as a result." She paused and seemed to take a deep breath. "The 
commodity that's going to make Rampart a valued corporate collaborator of Macrodur is 
called PD32:C2." 

My poor old brain was so full of horseshit and gun smoke that it took a moment for 
the full import of her words to hit me. Then I almost screamed into the communicator. 

"What? Evie, have you lost it? Or am I speaking to your friggin' demiclone?" 

"Calm down! Consider the prospect rationally. Is it really so unthinkable? I'm talking 
about allomorph eradication only, of course, after CHW makes a new treaty with the 
Haluk. One having stringent safeguards to ensure that the vector is used for nothing 
else—especially not demicloning. Rampart would then sell the vector to the aliens 
directly, at moderately fair prices." 

"I can't believe you're saying this!" 

But she continued serenely on. "We're assuming Gala-pharma is clobbered by our 
civil suit and forced into receivership first. That goes without saying. ICS might even 
obtain testimony against Gala from the other conspirator Concerns, in exchange for 
slapping them on the wrist rather than indicting them along with Gala." 

"Legitimizing the Haluk trade conspiracy retroactively!" 

"It's been done before, Asa. With the Joru, Kallenyi, and Y'tata." 

My retort was bitter. "And just like before we'll have funny business going on under 
the table—embargoed commodities peddled to the aliens on the sly! I know the way it 
works, Evie. Trying to stop it was my job at ICS Enforcement. Whenever we'd plug one 
leak in the dike, another would spring up. Except the Joru and Kallenyi and Y'tata don't 
want to take over the goddamn galaxy..." 

"I discussed the idea with Gunter at dinner this evening. He thinks a new Haluk treaty 
might fly. He also understands the realpolitik of the situation: throughout human history, 
implacable enemies have been transformed into friendly trading partners—given the 
proper incentive. Dan's wife Norma will be discreetly sounding out some of her 
Commonwealth Assembly colleagues, and Gunter is feeling the pulse of his contacts in 
ICS." 

"What about Macrodur?" 

"Stanislawski and his top execs know about the Haluk-PD32:C2 connection already, 
and about the existing illegal trading situation between the aliens and Galapharma. We— 
we had to put a guarded mention of it into the prospectus to show a major profit 
potential." 

I let out a groan of despair. "Oh, Evie." 

"The data were submitted under the strictest confidentiality, and we didn't name 
Gala's fellow Big Seven conspirators to Macrodur. That would have been strategically 
counterproductive." 

An awful certainty had invaded me as she spoke. "And is it also strategically 
counterproductive to submit our evidence of a Haluk expansionist threat to Efrem Sontag 
right now?" 

She did not answer for a moment. "I admit I'm tempted to reconsider our timing of the 


revelation. You can understand why." 

"Well, of course! We wouldn't want to show what scheming fuckers the Haluk really 
are if the Assembly is debating a new trade treaty with them—and Rampart is using them 
as a bargaining chip in its pitch to Macrodur. Heaven forbid that we paint the aliens as 
ravening bogeymen rather than potential customers!" 

"You're oversimplifying matters, Asa." 

"Yeah. That's me, all right. I'm just an ex-cop and a dive-charter skipper, not a 
hotshot corporate schemer or a politician. But I've got a nose for bad guys, and all my 
instincts tell me the Haluk are seriously bad." 

"If Rampart is ruined, we won't be in a position to do anything about the Haluk. 
Timing, Asa! It's all about timing, don't you see? And preserving our options." 

"That's what Simon said just before I quit Rampart. Now you're trying to convince me 
that he was right all along. Simon and his fucking Big Picture—" 

"We won't bury the Haluk evidence. We'll simply hold it in abeyance." 

"I can't accept that." 

She drew herself up. "You'll have to. I'm the CEO of Rampart Starcorp as well as a 
woman who's been personally victimized by the Haluk. And it's my decision that we'll 
wait on the Sontag presentation until Macrodur gives us a yes or no. Will you continue to 
stand by me, Asa? Or walk away, as you did with Simon?" 

"Evie—" 

"Areyou with me? " 

"Yes," I said. 

The half-alien face was less easy to read than one fully human, but her relief was 
palpable. "Thank you. I give you my solemn word that I will not allow the Haluk threat to 
be concealed or minimized. The moment Rampart is safe, I'll go to Sontag." 

"I believe you." 

A ferocious glint came into her eyes. "You know, if our prospectus is accepted by 
Macrodur, I think there's an excellent chance ICS will approve Concern status for 
Rampart immediately. Whereupon this comedy will be over—and Alistair Drummond 
can shit bricks and die!" 

"Unless he takes over Rampart before your grand happy ending comes to pass," I 
cautioned, "in which case the Haluk will continue to lead Galapharma and its 
confederates around by the nose, as I suspect they've been doing from the start of the 
conspiracy." 

"Drummond's not going to win, dammit!" 

"Evie, he's already holding a hand with four aces while you and I are still trying to fill 
our shaky royal flush. And don't forget there could be a homegrown joker in the pack." 

Her indomitable demeanor wilted, just a little. "The possible traitor inside our 
family..." 

"My first priority in the interrogations," I assured her, "will be to ask Ollie Schneider 
if such a person exists. But he might not know the answer. You've got to take the 
strongest precautions—keep alert for bushwhack tactics from Drummond or his inside 
man. I'm serious about this! The family's in mortal danger. Drummond won't hesitate to 
use violence to get his way, especially if he gets wind of your Macrodur prospectus. He 
won't just surrender if he sees his scheme starting to fall apart." 

Any more than a rabid skunk will. 


"Believe me, Asa. I do appreciate the danger. I'm doing everything in my power to 
keep all of us secure. We have bodyguards and armored hoppers, and Mom is—Oh, God, 
I nearly forgot! She wants to speak to you urgently. Ever since I told her to ignore reports 
of your death, she's begged me to contact you. I didn't dare tell her what shenanigans you 
were up to." 

I caught my breath. "She's not—" 

"Her health seems no better, no worse, than before. But I think you should call her at 
once." 

"All right. What the hell time is it in Arizona?" 

"Nearly midnight. But Mom sleeps very lightly these days. She'd want you to call 
now." 

"All right. I'll do it as soon as we're finished." 

The alien face smiled at me. "Thank you for everything, Asa." 

"You haven't done so badly yourself, Evie. I'll get back to you." 

"Goodbye." 

When the screen went to standby, I made the call to Katje's penthouse apartment in 
Phoenix. There was a wait before it was put through. I got up and stalked around Chispa's 
wardroom, which I'd appropriated as my office and improvised interrogation chamber. 
The last of the Perseus suns zipped past the viewport like spooked fireflies. We were 
entering Black Gap, the nearly starless region that separated the Spur from the Orion Arm 
of the galaxy. 

I decided that I was thirsty after the confrontation with Eve. Booze was a no-no given 
the chemicals pumped into me, so I ordered a big orange juice from the food unit and sat 
drinking and brooding with the lights turned low. 

Over the past six months, my mother had procrastinated endlessly when I urged her to 
put her quarterstake shares into a trust, not understanding—or refusing to acknowledge— 
that continuing to vote them herself placed her life in jeopardy. Katje's position, which 
she'd patiently reiterated to me—and which I had to admit made sense—was that only 
she could ensure that the Reversionist "charities" she championed would receive the 
shares' income. In any other arrangement, most especially a trust administered by her 
children and their legal advisors, there was a potential for declaring her mentally 
incompetent and cutting off funding to the unpopular political orgnizations, which 
advocated Insap rights and limiting the power of the Hundred Concerns. 

I wondered whether my older brother Dan or younger sister Beth had been putting 
pressure on Katje since the last board meeting. Or had Cousin Zed resumed his insidious 
meddling, urging her to make the Reversionists an outright gift of the shares 
immediately, knowing the money-hungry groups would side with him in voting for the 
Galapharma takeover? 

In my present state of decrepitude, I really didn't want to think about all that 
convoluted financial stuff. But I dearly loved my mother, so I was ready to give her 
whatever advice I could. 

Her face appeared on the screen at last, devastated by age and illness but as invincible 
as ever. Her hair was white, tightly curled to minimize its sparseness. The Delft-blue eyes 
were still bright, but deeply sunken in shadowed sockets. She disapproved of all forms of 
geriatric genetic engineering on principle, especially those that allowed the rejuvenated 
elderly to cling to power at the expense of the younger generation. Katje Vanderpost sat 


in an easychair in the library of her penthouse, wearing a dusty-rose peignoir trimmed 
with lace of the same color. She looked as though she weighed less than forty-five kilos. 

"Asa! Darling, it's so good to see you. Eve refused to tell me where you were. It was 
someplace dangerous, wasn't it?" 

"Of course not," I lied. "How are you, Mom?" 

She gave a light laugh. "You know how the doctors are. Always wanting me to 
submit to some damnfool treatment. 'To keep me going,' they say! But they never say 
where, do they? I'm seventy-eight and my useful work is long since done. Well ... most of 
it." Her smile was almost cunning. "Will you be home soon?" 

"I'm on my way. I'll see you in just a little over a week." 

"That's wonderful. Wonderful." Her head sank and the smile slowly dissolved to 
pensiveness. "I must ask you an important question." 

Here it comes, I thought. "Certainly." 

"Are you still a Throwaway?" 

"Why, no." What's this! "Just today I was officially rehired by Rampart. I'm a Vice 
President again. A citizen in good standing." 

"Oh, good. Gerry Gonzalez wasn't sure it would be legal if you were 
disenfranchised." She turned away for a moment, then held up an e-notebook and tapped 
a pad. "There! It's done." 

Gonzalez was a fire-breathing young Phoenix attorney, head of LISA, the most vocal 
of the Reversionist lobby groups. He was also Katje's private solicitor, in spite of the best 
efforts of Simon, Dan, and Bethany to dislodge him. 

"Mom, what are you up to now?" 

"Well, I know you were concerned about—about my personal safety, if I retained my 
quarterstake vote on the Rampart board." 

"And about Dan and Beth, too. Surely you haven't forgotten that threatening note 
Simon received after Eve's kidnapping." 

"But the children are very well-guarded. And so am I, of course. I never leave the 
apartment anymore except for an occasional visit to the Sky Ranch." 

"Even so—" 

"Asa, dear, the point is moot! No one can pressure me now. I've taken steps, after 
very careful consideration. You know, I thought I'd found the right solution when I 
decided to vote in favor of the merger at the next-to-the-last board meeting. But your 
father was very persuasive. He made me realize that I didn't have the right to unilaterally 
dismantle the Starcorp that Dirk helped to found. On the other hand, I'm determined that 
my charities not be deprived of the funding they need so desperately." 

"So what will you do? Turn your shares over to them now? Or make Gonzalez sole 
trustee?" 

"Oh, no. It would be too much of a temptation, you see. In a Galapharma merger, my 
quarterstake would increase tremendously in value. I want the charities to prosper, but 
not at the expense of my brother's dream. No—I've decided to do something completely 
different. Gerry was dubious when I first told him about it, but he came around in the 
end. The charities will continue to receive their just due, Rampart will have its chance to 
survive, and Daniel and Bethany and I will be safe from Galapharma's threats." The blue 
eyes twinkled as she held up the computer notebook again. "Guess what I've done?" 

I scowled. "Mom, no more games." 


One shoulder rose in a minute gesture of resignation. I was no fun at all. Then she 
said it. 

"I've just made a deed of gift to you, Asa. My entire quarter-stake, free of 
encumbrance. I know I can trust you to deal justly with the Reversionists. You made your 
feelings clear about the matter years ago. And I'm also confident that you'll do everything 
in your power to help Eve save Rampart." 

"My God! Mom—you can't do this!" 

"Yes, I can," she said, in a voice as bright and hard as the big diamond on her left ring 
finger. "And I have. The deed was executed and witnessed days ago. All I had to do was 
finalize it. My will has already been modified to reflect the change. Put a data-dime into 
your communicator, Asa, so I can send you the transcript." 

"Give your shares to Eve," I pleaded. "Or to Dan and Beth. I don't want this." 

I've run from it all my life... 

"Eve, Dan, and Beth will inherit your father's stake and divide it equally, twelve and 
one-half percent for each of them. But none of them would carry out my wishes in regard 
to the charities. They simply don't believe that galactic Big Business is an abomination, 
as you and I do." 

"But—" 

"Do as I say, dear. The dime." 

I took a microdisk from the little dispenser on the console and slipped it into the slot. 
A red telltale flashed on. Then it turned green. I felt a sick lump in my gut. This wasn't 
happening. 

Katje leaned forward and kissed the com display. Kissed the image of my face. "I 
must go now, dear. I'm very tired and I suspect you are, too. We'll have a long talk when 
you get here. Please don't let anyone know about this until we've spoken. Especially not 
your father. I want to be there when you tell Simon yourself." 

I had to smile. "Oh, Katje. You're a wicked old woman." 

"Sleep tight, Asa." Her head tilted and a bemused expression came over her. "I don't 
usually rest too well myself. But I think I will, tonight." 

The communicator went to blue. 

I stumbled off to my cabin, took the medication prescribed by the Cravat doctor, and 
hibernated for fifty-one hours. 

When I woke up, I went to the wardroom, unlocked it, removed the dime from the SS 
com, plugged it into my own notebook and called up the data. 

It hadn't been a dream. I still owned one-quarter of Rampart Starcorp. 

I had just finished eating an enormous breakfast after my long sleep, and was back in 
the wardroom preparing the equipment for the first stage of Ollie Schneider's 
interrogation, when the door chime sounded. 

I unlocked the door. Mimo stood there. His Don Quixote face was somber. "May I 
come in? There's something I must tell you." 

We sat down at the conference table. Whatever he had to say, it was bad. I braced 
myself. 

"Helly, your sister Eve contacted us two days ago with some very sad news. About 
your mother." 

An invisible monster took hold of my heart and squeezed. "Oh, no. Katje's dead, isn't 
she!" 


"Yes. I'm very sorry, mi hijo. Eve called a few hours after you had retired. She told 
me not to waken you when I explained that you were under medication and desperately in 
need of rest. You'll want to call her for the particulars. Eve did tell me that your mother's 
death was peaceful, in her sleep." 

Numbly, I thanked him. 

"Matt wonders if you would prefer to postpone the questioning of Schneider." 

"No. Give me an hour. Then ask her to join me. We'll carry on as planned." 

He nodded and left the room. 

I didn't weep; my tears tended to flow at odd, idiosyncratic times and not according to 
default emotional programming. I'd mourn Katje Vanderpost in my own way, when the 
time seemed right. 

Operating on mental autopilot, with the reality of the situation accepted and yet held 
firmly at arm's length, I opened the locked SS communicator and placed a call to Eve, 
only to discover that for some reason she was not available. I couldn't bear the thought of 
speaking to Dan or Beth. My brother was an icy, methodical type who hadn't hesitated to 
call Katje a silly fool for resisting the trust arrangement. My younger sister, just the 
opposite in temperament, was very likely crushed by sorrow. That left only one other 
person for me to talk to... 

It was barely morning in the high country of Arizona's Tonto Forest. He would rise 
early, as was his usual habit when in residence at the Sky Ranch, breakfasting before 
dawn so he could take a good long horseback ride before the intense summer heat cooked 
the resin out of the ponderosa pine needles and drove the birds and animals of the plateau 
into hiding. 

The ranch manager said he would transfer my SS call to a vidphone out in the barn, 
where my father was saddling his horse himself. When I asked if the InSec bodyguards 
were with Simon, the manager told me that the boss adamantly refused to have company 
on the dawn ride, insisting on being alone so he could "think." The security people were 
ordered to follow at a distance as best they could, some mounted and the others riding in 
a Land Rover. 

Simon picked up and gave me a curt greeting. "Hello, Asa. I was wondering when 
you'd get around to calling. Where the hell are you?" 

He was wearing a sweat-stained Resistol straw hat with a silver band and a light 
cotton shirt. The relayed image was none too clear, but I could discern that his crumpled, 
unshaven face bore the unmistakable patina of a monumental bender. Simon also had his 
own way of grieving. 

"I'm on my way home," I said. "We're about six days out after refueling at Tillinghast 
Starbase. I just now heard about Katje." 

"Yeah." His gaze intensified as he came closer to the wall-mounted video pickup. 
"Just what did you hear?" 

"Only that she'd died in her sleep. Eve left a message with Mimo a couple of days 
ago. I've been totally zoned out. Recovering from the Oliver Schneider retrieval." 

"Uh—Eve told me about that. Good work. I never expected—I mean, when you went 
back to Kedge-Lockaby I thought..." 

I knew what he'd thought. But my flaws weren't at issue. "Katje. Was it her heart?" 

"No." He lifted his head, and I realized that his green eyes were inflamed more with 
fury than with sorrow. "It was murder." 


"Jesus Christ! How?" 

"A cup of tea poisoned with sephrosamine, an exotic compound that leaves no trace 
in the body. But our Internal Security people found the goddamn used tea bag right there 
in Katje's kitchen." 

"Do they have a suspect?" 

"Yes and no. That old housekeeper of hers, Concha Cis-neros, left a note before 
taking a swan dive off the penthouse balcony. Said 'the man' told her the tea would be 
harmless, that she'd never meant to hurt Katje, that poor Freddy wasn't to blame." 

"Freddy? Who the fuck is Freddy?" 

"InSec pieced it together. Seems the housekeeper has a grandson, a priest, who was a 
bit of a chickenhawk. Got therapy, then fell off the wagon. Whoever 'the man' is, he 
threatened to blow the whistle on pedophilic Father Freddy unless Concha served the 
tea." 

"Alistair Drummond! That filthy bastard has to be responsible. He wanted Mom's 
quarterstake to go to the Reversionists." 

Simon's red-rimmed optics stared at me without blinking. "And now it has. But 
there's nothing to implicate the Insap-lovers or Galapharma in Katje's killing. Nothing at 
all." 

"Probably not." I took a ragged breath. "But it won't save Drummond's slimy hide. I'll 
skin him alive for this." 

Simon uttered an ungodly chuckle. "We'll see which of us gets to him first with the 
Buck knife." 

"Have—have you thought about funeral arrangements yet?" 

He shook his head with a sheepish air. "Tell the truth, I don't know what she would 
have wanted. Dan's going to Phoenix later this morning. He'll see that lawyer of Katje's 
about her will—what's his name? Geraldo Gonzalez. If she didn't specify, we'll do a 
cremation and scatter her ashes on the Sky Ranch. If you like, we can hold off the 
services until you get here." 

"No," I decided. "It's not necessary. You just go ahead." 

I knew what kind of memorial my mother really would have wanted, and it had 
nothing to do with preachers and flowers and bone dust blowing in the mountain wind. 
She wanted justice for the human-exploited indigenous peoples of the galaxy, an 
impossible dream. 

Or was it? 

My own youthful ideals in that direction, long since submerged in disillusion and 
misfortune, gave a wan flicker. Chief Divisional Inspector A. E. Frost had seen his noble 
ambitions ruthlessly crushed, and Helmut Icicle was too mired in self-pity to care about 
abused aliens. But Asahel Frost, quarterstakeholder in an Amalgamated Concern, just 
might be able to make a difference... 

The feeble spark flared mischievously, just for an instant, then subsided back into 
dormancy. Speculation along those lines was not only premature, it was damn near 
laughable. 

Shows what I knew. 

"About Katje's will," Simon was saying. "This Gonzalez fella is a notorious 
Reversion Party activist. She probably made him trustee for all the groups inheriting her 
shares. According to Starcorp bylaws, the quarterstake trustee gets an automatic seat on 


the board and can demand an immediate meeting. Dan and Zed are champin' at the bit, all 
eager for it, damn their eyes. They just want the hassle over and done with." 

"Simon, that's not—" 

But he barged ahead with his scenario of corporate doom. 

"Gonzalez'll call for a vote on the merger and say 'Aye.' Thora Scranton will join him, 
voting the Small Stakeholders' twenty-five percent. If Emma Bradbury votes along with 
them—which I think is most likely—Gala flat-out rakes in the pot. If Emma defies Zed 
and throws her twelve-point-five in with me, we end up with a fifty-fifty stalemate and I 
have to poll the other board members. You know what that'll mean! Votes against 
Galapharma: Emma, Gunter, and Eve. Votes in favor: Zed, Dunne, Rivello, Scranton, 
Beth, Dan, and Gonzalez. Six-four Galapharma—and adios, muchachos" 

He finally ran out of steam, giving me the chance to say, "Wrong!" 

"That's the way it'll be," he said gruffly. 

"No it won't, Pop." And I told him why, watching the blotchy color drain from his 
ravaged face and his mouth fall open in shock and disbelief. 

"An unencumbered gift? To you! My sweet Lord! How— how could she?" 

Poor old Simon Frost didn't know whether to shit or go blind. His chagrin was almost 
laughable. Rescued by the scapegrace son and bent cop! 

Twice over, actually. 

He finally mumbled, inanely, "Don't tell me you're gonna hand over the stake 
earnings to that gang of xeno-hugging kooks! If you reinvested it in Rampart—" 

"The financial aspect is none of your damn business," I snapped. "The only thing that 
concerns you is my vote. Me plus you plus Emma equals a winning combo. Even if 
Emma backs out, you and I still have the 62.5 to flatten the opposition." 

"Yes." I could barely hear his voice, and he'd lowered his head so that his face was 
deeply shadowed by the brim of his beat-up hat. Then he looked full at me, the impact of 
my words finally coming home to him. "Yes, by God! Yes!" 

"There's only one way Drummond can salvage the situation now," I warned. "By 
eliminating you." 

"Let the cocksuckin' pencil-dick sidewinder try!" Raging green eyes that were 
identical to my own blazed like those of a catamount caught by a jacklight. 

"He will, Simon. Count on it. Unless you want to change your own will. Pass your 
entire stake on to Eve, rather than dividing it among her and Dan and Beth." 

"Wouldn't be fair," he growled. "Especially now that you got yours." 

Oh, boy. "Well, at least start thinking more seriously about your own safety. Lay off 
the solitary morning rides—for the next six days, anyhow, until I get to Earth and we 
torpedo the takeover. Eve and I have decided Rampart should file the civil suit 
immediately, as soon as Schneider's evidence is validated. I want you there in Toronto 
when we march into the Judiciary Tribunal." 

"Dammit-all, Asa, I don't need the likes of you giving me orders!" 

"You listen to me and listen good, you old fool! I just about died on Dagasatt 
collecting Ollie Schneider for you. And I sure as hell didn't risk my neck and get a bunch 
of other people killed just so a mule-headed old fart could screw things up through his 
own idiot carelessness. You want to see Alistair Drummond get what's coming to him, 
you better do what I fuckin' well tell you to do!" 

"Huh." A grin broke over his face like sunrise over the Sierra Ancha. "Really think 


you're hot shit, don't you." 

"Lukewarm, anyhow." I cut off the subspace communicator. 

Matt and I interrogated Oliver Schneider for only three hours in the initial session, 
working him so gently that his vital signs almost never registered above the normal 
range. 

The first important question I asked produced a disappointing result. Schneider could 
not say with certainty whether a member of the Frost family, or one of the Rampart 
Board of Directors, was secretly in league with Galapharma. 

If such a person did exist, Schneider was inclined to put Zared Frost at the top of the 
list of suspects. Cousin Zed had hired Schneider and encouraged his sweeping 
reorganization of the Security Department inherited from Karl Nazarian. Zed made no 
bones about his admiration of Ollie's abilities. He'd rubber-stamped dubious changes in 
security protocols that gave InSec wider access to sensitive financial and legal material 
that would ordinarily have been outside the purlieu of that department, changes that had 
eased theft of data by Schneider's moles and pinpointed field operations vulnerable to 
sabotage. Zed had also defended the security chief's innocence right up until the moment 
Ollie and his buddies had flown the coop. 

But did Schneider have any positive evidence linking Zed to Galapharma? Not really. 
My cousin's actions could be ascribed just as easily to naivete and misplaced trust as to 
malice. 

The next question I asked Oliver Schneider was, "Are you a Haluk demiclone?" 

He burst out laughing. He said, "Abso-fucking-lutely HO!" 

The machines indicated he told the truth. 

With that out of the way, we simply told him to relate his involvement with 
Galapharma from the beginning, in as much detail as he could remember. He complied 
with hardly any prompting from us. 

Schneider had been tentatively approached by Quillan McGrath, alias Bronson Elgar, 
in 2228, around about the same time that I was being set up to take a fall in the ICS. He 
was able to tell me positively that my frame-up was personally engineered by Tyler 
Baldwin, Alistair Drummond's head of security, in order to get me out of the picture 
before the active takeover attempt began. They feared, quite rightly, that I might use my 
high position in the Enforcement Division of the Interstellar Commerce Secretariat to 
sniff out a conspiracy aimed at the family Starcorp. Drummond had ordered me killed 
outright; it was Baldwin who convinced the Gala CEO that my spectacular disgrace 
would better serve the cause by doing a mindfuck on my father and softening him up for 
the multipronged takeover assault. 

Shortly after I was convicted, Oliver Schneider was hooked and reeled in by Baldwin, 
agreeing to become a key player in the conspiracy to devalue Rampart. Among other 
things, he arranged for the murder of Yaoshuang Qiu, a key executive, hatched sabotage 
schemes, fomented Insap insurrections on Rampart worlds, and engineered the pernicious 
manipulation of data. Ollie's compensation for the chicanery was a substantial wad of 
Galapharma stock, plus a humongous amount of cash deposited to a secret account on 
Saraia-Beta, the notorious freesoil haven for dirty money. 

Being nobody's fool, Schneider took out his insurance policy as soon as he entered 
Gala's covert employ. He prepared two duplicate packets of incriminating materials, 
including holovids of McGrath and Baldwin made secretly during the recruiting sessions, 


sealed them, and deposited them with a venerable Toronto law firm of irreproachable 
character. One of the firm's senior partners, Jaswinder Singh, had gone to McGill 
University with Schneider and they had shared many an undergraduate romp. Details of 
these long-ago escapades, narrated by Ollie at unfailing intervals of four weeks while his 
friend checked his voice with a stress-indicator, formed the simple "code" ensuring that 
one sealed packet remained in the law firm's vault, and the other in a safe deposit box in 
Singh's bank. According to Schneider's instructions, if he failed to call Singh and relate a 
genuine anecdote—or if his voice pattern indicated that the communication was made 
under duress—the packets were to be hand-delivered to ICS Enforcement and the Chief 
Prosecutor of the Commonwealth Judiciary. The same procedure was to be followed in 
the event of Schneider's death, from any cause. Naturally, Singh, the guarantor of the 
insurance policy, received a handsome emolument. 

The next insurance call to him was due in three days. I decided to let Ollie make it in 
advance. It would be disastrous to my corporate strategy to have Schneider's 
incriminating balloon go up ahead of schedule, and I was already feeling leery about 
what we might encounter when we approached Tomgat. 

Further gleanings from Schneider's excellent memory: After my sister Eve was 
rescued from her kidnappers, Karl Nazarian's sleuthing fingered Ollie and four of his 
close associates in Rampart Security as traitors. They fled Seriphos and requested asylum 
from the Galapharma resident agent on the Haluk planet Artiuk. By that time 
Elgar/McGrath was deceased, thanks to me, and his position assumed by Erik Skogstad. 

Skogstad psychoprobed the fugitive Ollie with exceptional rigor—"Reamed me out 
like a Halloween pumpkin!"— and learned about the insurance policy. Unfortunately for 
Galapharma, the Toronto law firm's vault proved to be impregnable—as did the safe 
deposit box—and Jaswinder Singh was too politically connected to be coerced and too 
straitlaced to be bribed. 

So Schneider was permitted to live, at least until the contents of his dangerous 
packets became irrelevant and immaterial to any civil action against Galapharma 
Amalgamated Concern by Rampart. 

Connected to our psychotronic machines, Oliver Schneider readily agreed to hand 
over the packets of evidence to us, provided that Rampart's CEO reiterated my promise of 
immunity in the presence of his solicitor friend. 

I told him that Eve would be delighted to do so. It was arranged that Ollie would call 
Jaswinder Singh on the SS com immediately, and make an appointment to meet him at 
his office upon our arrival in Toronto. Singh, the evidence packets, and Ollie would then 
proceed with me and my party to Rampart Tower. Shortly after that, Eve, Simon, Dan, 
and I would draw a legal line in the sand, and invite Alistair Drummond and Galapharma 
to a Shootout at the Rampart corral. 

When Matt and I concluded the first interrogation session— and the subspace call to 
Singh was accomplished—we escorted the prisoner back to the brig. He was suffering 
only a minimal amount of reactionary discomfort. We planned to limit Schneider's 
questioning to three easy hours in the morning and three in the afternoon. With six days 
remaining of the trip to Earth, we figured we had ample time to drain his brain of 
anything relevant. 

When we weren't working on Ollie, we'd grill Jim Mat-sukawa with considerably less 
tenderness. 


Matt and I had lunch, then returned to the wardroom where we transmitted the results 
of Ollie's first session to Eve. Then we prepared a list of topics for Gala's Dagasatt duty 
officer. Among the most crucial: 

1. Are the Haluk planning to wage war on the human race? 

2. Why are the Haluk producing humanoid demiclones? 

3. What does Galapharma know about demiclone production? 

4. Where are the other demiclone facilities located? 

5. Are you a Haluk demiclone? 

6. Who else among the high-ranking Galapharma agents and executive personnel are 
Haluk demiclones? 

7. How many humanoid demiclones exist and where are they? 

8. Do the Haluk possess starships capable of a pseudo-velocity in excess of seventy 
ross? How many? What armament do they carry? 

9. What was happening on the Haluk planet Artiuk a few days ago, when the Servant 
of Servants of Luk met with representatives of Galapharma's trading associates? 

10. Who was the fourth person Jim called in Toronto, when the Dagasatt facility was 
attacked by me? 

When we had the answers, we were going to forward them to Eve immediately. Even 
though she intended to delay her show-and-tell with Efrem Sontag, I wanted Jim's data 
safe in her files. With a possible traitor aboard the starship, plus God-knew-what waiting 
for us at Torngat, there was a real risk that we might not make it to Earth. 

Unlike the evidence from Schneider, which pertained to a civil suit and had to be 
personally validated by the interrogators—Matt and me—in order to be legally 
admissible, information about an alien plot against humanity was "intelligence." Once 
Sontag had it in hand, it would be evaluated with the utmost diligence even if all of us 
aboard Chispa died, and Alistair Drummond destroyed Rampart. At least I hoped that's 
what would happen... When we were ready to begin on Matsukawa, Matt called Ivor on 
her intercom and asked that he and Mimo bring the prisoner forward. After a few 
minutes' delay, Ivor replied. "I'm sorry, Matt, but Jim appears to be ill." She and I 
exchanged glances. I asked, "How so?" In his meticulous, pedantic fashion Ivor told us. 
"His hands are cold and clammy, his forehead is covered with cold perspiration, and he 
complains of nausea, weakness, and excessive production of saliva." 

"Bring him here anyhow," I ordered. Then I told Matt, "Go get one of those 
diagnosticon gadgets from sick bay. We'll find out if Jimbo is faking." 

"Maybe he's terrified," Matt suggested, heading for the door. 

"If that's all it is, we're okay. But if the guy's caught a genuine bug, we'll have to put 
off the interrogation. Even human sickees give anomalous responses to the machines." 

She nodded and went out, leaving me to consider some other technical aspects of the 
torturer's art. 

If Matsukawa really was an alien, it could pose problems in psychotronic 
interrogation. Darrel Ridenour, the presumed demiclone guard, had reacted atypically 
when I questioned him with the drug penverol, falling into what seemed to be a coma. 
Penverol was supposed to be less damaging to the mind than probing, but perhaps the 
Haluk were abnormally sensitive to any sort of psychoactive messing about. Their 
mutated genes might be largely human, but that didn't mean their mentalities were. In a 
mature individual, personality traits and general mental function are only minimally 


controlled by DNA—as any parent of identical twins, or cloner of racehorses, can 
attest—which is why the demiclone masquerade was feasible. 

I wondered if it might be more prudent to postpone Mat-sukawa's questioning until 
we reached professional facilities on Earth. On the other hand— 

A chime from the wardroom door. 

I opened it and Ivor and Mimo came in, supporting the Galapharma duty officer 
between them. Matsukawa shuffled along listlessly, seeming uninterested in his 
surroundings. He did not look frightened. His face was a livid greenish-gray and his black 
hair and T-shirt were soaked with sweat. Ivor and I sat him down in the barber chair and 
removed the hand and leg restraints he'd worn. I held off strapping him to the chair and 
attaching the various sensors. 

"Feeling under the weather, Jim?" I inquired in a friendly fashion. 

"Yes. Maybe I picked up something on Cravat." 

"Not very likely, what with all the precautions they have in place. You want to tell me 
what seems to be wrong? When did you first feel sick?" 

By way of response he gave a throttled gulp, bent forward and vomited between his 
spread legs. 

I muttered, "Shit," and summoned a cleanerbot with my wrist intercom. 

Ivor, our ad hoc medic, held Jim's head while he retched and yielded up what was left 
of his breakfast. In anticipation of the grilling, we hadn't allowed him any lunch. His 
digestive juices smelled human. 

After a while the heaves turned dry. I got him a glass of water from the wardroom 
dispenser and he sipped it weakly before slumping back in the chair. If he was 
malingering, he was a thespian genius. 

Matt came back into the wardroom, carrying a small instrument and looking grim. 
"The diagnosticon's broken, Helly.Takealook." 

I checked the thing. It wouldn't even power up. "Maybe somebody did a number on it, 
maybe not." 

"I can try to fix it," Mimo offered. "Joe is also handy at repairs." 

Ivor said, "Sick bay has a Doc-in-the-Box computer that controls the treatment couch. 
If we feed his symptoms into it—" 

"Aagh!" Matsukawa was suddenly writhing in Ivor's grasp. "Toilet—quick—for 
chrissake!" 

Ivor said, "Whoa! Hang in there, man!" 

He scooped the officer up in his mighty arms like a baby and dashed down the 
corridor toward the nearest John, narrowly avoiding a collision with a small janitorial 
machine that came trundling along to deal with the mess. 

Mimo said, "What shall I do? Clean the chair?" The bot had started mopping the 
floor. 

"I'll take care of that. You help Ivor get Jim into sick bay. Both of you stay with the 
prisoner at all times until he's back under restraint." Mimo went away and I said to Matt, 
"I'll search Jim's cell in the brig and you go replay the surveillance holovid and see what 
he's been doing over the past twelve hours or so. This sudden illness is mighty damned 
convenient." 

We separated, securing the wardroom after us. I went aft to the new lockup facility 
that had been fitted during our brief stay on Cravat. It was very simple. A block of four 


small cabins had been segregated from the other passenger accommodations by means of 
two gates across the main corridor. Any crew member could unfasten the gates. Each cell 
was a little over three meters square and could be unlocked only by a live iris-scan of 
Matt, Mimo, or me. All the cell furnishings had been removed except for a bolted-down 
cot, chair, and table. An entertainment unit was mounted on each cell wall. There were no 
cabinets or other places where items might be concealed. The prisoners' clothing and 
effects were stacked on a shelf under the table. An adjoining doorless bathroom held a 
toilet, an open shower, and a washbasin with a shelf for personal care items. A barred 
observation window had been cut into the outer cell door. The interior was under constant 
surveillance from a fish-eye camera and a respiration-rate detector inset in the ceiling 
opposite the bathroom. 

Since we had only two prisoners, the extra cabins had their sliding doors left wide 
open. The third cell was set up as a sort of lounge for the convenience of crew members 
pulling guard duty. The fourth served as a temporary holding area while the occupied 
cells were cleaned or inspected. When Garth Wing Lee joined us at Torngat, we'd just 
toss him into the empty pen. 

I checked out Jim Matsukawa's cell meticulously and found no contraband 
whatsoever. His e-books were undamaged and so was the game control unit, so he hadn't 
poisoned himself by eating toxic bits of electronic circuitry. The toiletry containers he'd 
been furnished with were still nearly full. He hadn't consumed quantities of shave-gel, 
skin cleanser, shampoo, mouthwash, or pit sauce. I made a mental note to replace the 
items, just in case the Fungus Among Us had concealed poison in any of them. 

As a precaution, Matt had set up the "day shift" guard duty roster to include two 
people. Joe and Ildiko were never paired. Only Matt, Mimo, and I would pull solitary 
watches, during the prisoners' sack time. We could sleep while the respiration-rate sensor 
monitored the inmates, set to wake us if somebody began breathing atypically—or not at 
all. It wasn't a perfect security setup, but it was the best we could manage under the 
circumstances. 

Matt came along with a holoviewer just as I was winding up my search. I said, "Find 
anything? I'm coming up with a big fat zero." 

"The surveillance record shows nothing unusual on a quickie preliminary scan," she 
said. "Matsukawa seems to have had trouble with his bowels this morning. It was 
probably the beginning phase of his illness. During the twelve-hour period he ingested 
the meals given him, water from his own sink. . . and occasional plastic cups of coffee or 
pop pushed through the cell bars by people on guard duty." 

"What?" 

"Guards and the two prisoners, all drinking from the same coffee pot. And the soft 
drink thermoses were sealed before the contents were poured into cups. I suppose the 
crew thought there was no harm in sharing." 

"Rats! Who passed drinks to Jim?" 

"Wait one sec while I check again." She looked into the viewer eyepiece and played 
with fast-forward and reverse for a few minutes. "Mmm. Everyone seems to have done it 
except me and thee. Even Mimo." She shook her head as she turned off the viewer. "They 
were all briefed on the possible presence of a Galapharma ringer among us and the need 
for extreme caution." 

I gave an exasperated sigh. "What's done is done, but it better not happen again. 


Chew 'em out later. Let's get on to sick bay now and see what the Doc-in-the-Box has to 
say." 

Ivor and Mimo had placed Matsukawa on the treatment couch. He was lying with his 
eyes shut, breathing regularly. His skin had returned to a near-healthy sallow hue. 

"He said he felt much better," Ivor said, "then dropped off to sleep." 

I studied the vital-signs monitor above the couch. His body temp was nearly normal 
and his heartbeat just a tad fast. I didn't know how to interpret the blood pressure and 
other data, so I entered all the symptoms Ivor had described earlier, plus vomiting and 
diarrhea, and ordered the computer to provide a diagnosis. 

The machine said, Blood sample, please. 

"Anybody know how to do that?" I inquired. 

Mimo shrugged. Ivor consulted an e-book of medical procedures he was evidently 
familiar with, gently lifted Matsukawa's hand out of a little trough at the edge of the 
gadget-laden couch, and frowned. 

"There should be a sampling unit plugged in here. A device about the size of a deck 
of cards. But it's gone." 

"Beautiful," I grumbled. "Don't bother searching. I have a feeling it's ascended to the 
great recyling bin in the sky." 

"Can't you simply prick his finger?" Mimo wanted to know. 

"Our sick bay has no equipment to analyze blood that's outside a patient's body," Ivor 
said. 

I addressed the computer. "No blood sample available. Deliver the diagnosis." 

Probability two percent that the patient suffers from a psychosomatic disorder. 
Probability eleven percent that the patient suffers from a disability induced by a 
deleterious microorganism. Probability fifty-nine percent that the patient suffers from 
poisoning. A list of 726 possible toxic compounds and bioagents that may be implicated 
appears on the display. 

Everyone except snoozing Matsukawa let out groans of frustration. 

"Treatment?" I asked. 

No specific treatment can be recommended aside from bed rest and ample intake of 
fluids. The patient's condition at this time is not serious. 

"Just bad enough to preclude interrogation," Matt said to me in a low voice. 
"Somebody slipped him a mickey. Or he took it himself." 

Mimo said, "We'll have to monitor his food and drink from now on." 

I nodded. "Well, if he's not seriously ill there's no reason why he can't go back to his 
cell. Matt, let's you and me collect Ollie Schneider and bring him to the wardroom. We'll 
have another go at him and save old Jimbo for tomorrow, when he feels better." 

But early next afternoon, just before we were about to attempt interrogation again, 
Matsukawa's symptoms returned with a vengeance. He collapsed moaning onto his cell 
floor, dripping with sweat. Then he went into convulsions. 

Joe and Matt, pulling guard duty at the time, rushed him to sick bay. Ivor and I came 
running. The patient had a feeble pulse, his breathing was fitful, and his pupils had 
shrunk to pinpoints. We plugged him into the Doc-in-the-Box and waited for its verdict 
with dismal foreboding. 

The medical computer ordered us to give Jim several medications. Then it said: You 
are advised to transport the patient to the nearest hospital without delay. His condition is 


critical. 

 

 

Chapter 13 

 

It is Alistair Drummond's perverse idea to go horseback riding while he receives the 
latest progress report, undeterred by the fact that it is August in Arizona, and on most 
days the air temperature in the unsheltered regions around the Phoenix Conurbation 
approaches 40 degrees Celsius. However, the Galapharma CEO has taken it into his head 
to view the Sky Ranch from afar and refuses to be dissuaded. Besides, he says, it should 
be much cooler in the high country. 

So he is forced to make the arrangements, utilizing a guide service having longtime 
ties to Rampart, with personnel who are experienced and discreet. The booking is done 
anonymously; the service knows only that he is a Rampart executive of high status with 
an eccentric guest to amuse. 

Copper Mountain, 2,071 meters elevation and some eleven kilometers south of the 
spread, provides the only vantage point unlikely to be under close surveillance by ranch 
security forces. The ride is a popular one for tourists in spring and fall—although not in 
the furnace heat of high summer. Numbers of people are intrigued by the famous Frost 
domain, which combines the elements of a working modern cattle operation with those of 
a deliberately archaic family retreat. Traveling the slightly hazardous Copper Mountain 
Trail on horseback not only provides the curious with a long-range view of the Sky 
Ranch, but also affords an outing in a beautiful high-desert landscape and the opportunity 
to poke around a romantic old abandoned gold mine. 

Is this oddly chosen day-trip just another control ploy on Drummond's part? He is 
certain that the Gala CEO doesn't 

give a damn about southwestern scenery, and wonders apprehensively whether 
information about the prospectus offer to Macrodur might have reached Drummond in 
spite of the heroic efforts at secrecy organized by Eve and the others. 

God help me if Alistair knows about that, he thinks. The news I'll have to give him 
about Katje's quarterstake is devastating enough. Why, the crazy bastard might just kill 
me on the spot! 

There are dark rumors of such things having happened many years ago, when 
Drummond was a young site manager working on Galapharma worlds far from 
Commonwealth oversight. Still, the Chairman and CEO of an Amalgamated Concern 
would hardly resort to personal violence nowadays, would he? Most especially not on a 
difficult mountain trail, with a local guide as a witness. 

No, he thinks. My neck is safe. For now, at any rate. So whoopee-ti-yi-oh! I'm off to 
play cowboy with one of the most dangerous men in the galaxy... 

Alistair Drummond has said he will provide his own transport to the rendezvous. He 
rents a Toyota four-wheeler for himself at Scottsdale Municipal Airport—he is too well 
known at Sky Harbor—using a blind-draft Rampart EFT card, and drives 120 twisty 
kilometers to the trailhead. It is in the middle of nowhere, on a dirt track east of the 
quaintly named hamlet of Punkin Center. Understandably, he has never taken this 
particular ride, but the country surrounding the Sky Ranch is familiar enough and he 
arrives without incident at 083 5 hours. 


At the trailhead, an arid flat surrounded by forested mountains of moderate height, he 
finds an empty Mercedes sport utility vehicle—an obvious rental—parked beside a big 
lemon-yellow Dodge Ram pickup with a matching horse trailer. A sign on the trailer says 
AMPERSAND GUEST RANCH— PAYSON, AZ. Three horses, saddled and ready, are hitched to 
the pickup's bumper. Two men sit inside the truck. 

The morning weather is mercifully overcast and cool. He gets out of his four-wheeler 
and settles a broad-brimmed straw hat onto his head. He wears a featherweight Allison 
jacket with environmental controls, faded old Levi's jeans, and scuffed low-heel boots. 

The pickup truck doors open. A pleasant-faced young cowboy, lean as a desert 
grasshopper, emerges and gives a cordial wave to the new arrival before coming over to 
greet him. Alistair Drummond also climbs out. He remains near the horses, sipping from 
a plastic coffee cup. 

"Mornin' Citizen Jones," says the young man. "I'm Randy Herrero, your guide." His 
eyes flicker approvingly over the client's garb. "Guess you've ridden before." 

"A little. You can call me Scotty. I hope you haven't had to wait long." 

"No problem. Me'n Citizen Smith have been going over the route. It's pretty steep in 
places, but we've got good strong mounts. I reckon we should reach a suitable lookout 
point in two, three hours. You do your sightseeing, we have lunch, then ride back by the 
long and scenic route if you like. I don't think we'll have to worry much about heat 
today." 

The two men walk back to the truck and the horses. Randy Herrero does a final check 
of the cinches and the gear. Alistair Drummond gives a curt nod of greeting to "Scotty 
Jones" but says nothing. His glacial eyes are hidden behind wire-rimmed sun goggles. 

In honor of the occasion, he has outfitted himself with brand-new Western wear: 
black jeans, a black shirt with white piping, a white neckerchief, and a black straw hat. 
With his tawny hair, chiseled features, and regal bearing, he resembles a parody of an 
ancient Western movie hero. Drummond has made the common tenderfoot mistake of 
buying premium-priced high-heeled boots with very pointed toes, virtually impossible to 
walk in with any comfort until they are well broken in. 

Good! 

Each saddle has a global navigator, a phone, a powerpoint to plug in envirogear and 
other effete accessories, two enormous canteens, and a cantle-pack for emergency 
equipment, food, and personal items. The guide also carries a cased blaster carbine and 
wears an Ivanov stunner of unusual design on a traditional gunfighter's belt. He has 
informed the clients that the pistol will coldcock any sort of hostile critter from a 
blacktail rattler to a cougar and leave them none the worse for wear. 

"You need me to give you a hand, Scotty?" Randy asks diffidently, when it's time to 
mount. 

But he adjusts his own stirrups and lofts himself into the saddle. His hammerhead 
pinto, who is named Paco, stands solid as a rock. 

"Guess not," Randy Herrero laughs. 

Drummond says coldy, "I'd like some assistance, if you please. I'm more used to 
English-style tack. Please hold the horse's head." 

"Sure thing, Al." The guide helps the second dude get settled on a big blue roan 
gelding. 

"No whip?" Drummond says with a frown. 


"Western horses don't take kindly to 'em," Herrero says. "Use the ends of the reins if 
you really feel you have to. But Bluebell, there, is a sweetie. You talk to him right, he'll 
do whatever you want." He mounts his own palomino. "I know you two gents want to 
have some private conversation, so I'll forgo the usual tourist spiel and give you plenty of 
room. Just don't fall too far behind me, and keep a sharp eye out for rattlesnakes. We got 
a plague of them sumbitches in these mountains and they do spook the horses. Ready? 
Let's ride!" 

The clients stay well behind Herrero as the party crosses the flat, following his lead 
through catclaw, ocotillo, and dusty sagebrush. The path is neither clear nor well-beaten, 
and only an occasional hoofprint or heap of desiccated horse manure indicates that it has 
been used recently. Copper Mountain, a broad and hulking mass with formidable cliffs, 
rises ahead of them. 

The flat ends in a tumble of rocks, and a more obvious trail becomes visible. Wide 
enough for two to ride abreast, it climbs steeply up a slope dotted with scraggly junipers, 
paloverdes, and a few stately century plants with six-meter stalks crowned by candelabras 
of yellow flowers. The sky is beginning to clear and a faint breeze blows. It is very quiet 
except for the clip-clopping of the horses, the clatter of dislodged stones, and creaking 
leather. 

They ride without speaking for nearly an hour. 

Finally, Alistair Drummond says in a low tone, "I swept the saddles for bugs. They're 
clean." 

He controls his irritation. "I told you this guide outfit was completely reliable." 

"Is Simon still determined to file the civil suit immediately?" 

"There was nothing any of us could do to prevent it. It'll go to the prosecutors as soon 
as Asa and Matt Gregoire validate Schneider's deposition. But it's not the disaster it may 
seem on the surface. Surely you realize that." 

Drummond nods. "If the takeover succeeds." He rides on without speaking for a few 
minutes. Then: "I saw Katje Van-derpost's obituary. My congratulations. Was her death 
ascribed to natural causes?" 

A pang of red anger and guilt seizes him. But he thrusts it aside, as he has frequently 
since that night, because it would be fatal to acknowledge the full import of what he has 
done. 

"Yes. My InSec people tidied the scene. The poison that was used leaves no residue 
in the body. The—the person who administered it threw herself off the penthouse balcony 
when she realized what she'd done. I'd told her the poison was a harmless coercive drug." 

"Convenient. Who did the job for you?" 

"She was a longtime housekeeper of Katje's. A simpleminded dupe. Her death was so 
clearly suicide that we didn't even have to interfere with the Phoenix Police investigation. 
The coroner's verdict cited despondency at the demise of her beloved employer." 

"And Katje's will is being expedited in probate, with the share-voting rights 
affirmed?" 

"Yes..." 

"Excellent. When will the board meeting be held?" 

"It hasn't been scheduled yet, Alistair." He steels himself. "Katje didn't bequeath her 
quarterstake to the Reversionist charities after all. She changed her will the very night 
before she died. No one knew what she was planning except her attorney, an insolent 


young prick who's always resisted the— um—lures and blandishments of the rest of the 
family." 

"Who got the stake?" Drummond demands in a harsh whisper. " Who, damn you? 
Don't tell me she bequeathed it to Eve!" 

"It's worse," he admits. "Katje executed a deed of gift, without any legal 
encumbrances. She gave her entire quarter-stake to Asa. And she did it while she was 
alive, so we can't even contest the will." 

The CEO of Galapharma stiffens violently in his saddle, almost as though he has been 
electroshocked. The roan gelding shies at the unexpected spasm of the rider, and 
Drummond brings it back under control with swift ruthless-ness. For several minutes he 
only stares blindly ahead of him. Then he hauls back with a savage yank on the reins, and 
Bluebell squeals, turns, and comes to a dead halt, facing the other rider. 

Drummond says, "I think our relationship must be terminated. As of now." 

"If you wish." He manages to keep his own voice equable, and good old Paco stays 
calm. "However, I believe I can still contain the situation. Shall I tell you how?" 

Ahead on the trail Randy Herrero calls out, "Everything okay back there, gents?" 

"Just fine! We'll be right along," he replies. 

"Your plan had better be a good one," Drummond hisses. "If my people have to 
intervene to ensure that the merger succeeds, the fallout will be disastrous for your 
family—and for you. I must have Rampart. I will have it! You know very well that the 
survival of Galapharma depends upon it." 

"Yes. I know." 

"Tell me what you intend to do." Drummond thumps the ribs of the gelding, which 
gives a long-suffering sigh. The two riders move forward again, side by side. 

"I'll kill Asa myself, just before the board meeting. He'll be on his guard against 
attacks from your agents once he arrives on Earth, but he has no reason to suspect that 
I'm ... a Gala partisan." He adds pointedly: "What I have in mind can only be brought off 
by a member of the Frost family. Someone Asa trusts." 

"Hmm," says Drummond. You can almost see the clockwork wheels revolving inside 
his head as he assesses the prospect of eliminating the middleman. 

Let's stamp out that notion right away! 

"And I'll need your wholehearted cooperation from now on, Alistair—not threats and 
insults—if I'm to bring it off successfully." He smiles thinly. "As a matter of fact, I'll 
need a bit more than that. I want a signed letter of intent from you, declaring that I'll be 
named Chief Operating Officer of the Rampart Division of Galapharma AC, to serve in 
that position for a period of no less than ten years, at an annual stipend equal to your own. 
I also require a thirty percent stake in the division—not twenty-five, as we discussed 
earlier—in recognition of my valued assistance as your personal agent during the 
Rampart acquisition." 

Silence. Then, very quietly, Drummond says, "I see." 

"I'm happy that you do. I've sensed our relationship deteriorating for some time now, 
even though I've done my utmost for you. I'll certainly continue to do everything in my 
power to assist you, if you'll just cut me some slack. I've thrown my lot in with 
Galapharma and I can't turn back." 

"Especially not after Katje," says the Gala CEO. But his truculence seems to have 
melted away abruptly. He reaches out to pat the shoulder of the man riding beside him. 


"Lad, if you want the letter of intent, you shall have it. Holographic, if it'll help prove the 
wholeheartedness of my... cooperation." 

"That would be eminently satisfactory." 

Drummond's laugh is almost roguish. "I'll scribble it up at lunchtime. How's that? No 
hard feelings, eh? Damn it all, I apologize for bullying you, for my filthy mannerisms. 
Blame the stresses of my position. And the undeniable truth that I'm an arrogant bloody 
bastard!" 

"You're a brilliant businessman with a transgalactic vision, Alistair." 

And probably half mad with vainglorious ambition.. . 

But he doesn't dare dwell on that thought. Calmness, cornpetence, and courage have 
sustained him through another mortal crisis. He's delivered bad news to the beast yet 
again and survived. Even more, Drummond has finally agreed to sign the letter of intent 
that he tapdanced away from back at the beginning of their clandestine association. 

Alistair still can't pull off the takeover without him, much as he'd like to! 

"Is it all right then?" Drummond demands with arch chumminess. 

"Of course. You want to know why Asa's death will immediately assure that the 
board votes for the acquisition?" 

"Lad, I'm all ears." 

The explanation is ludicrously simple. When he finishes, they ride on silently for a 
long time, single file now because of the narrowness of the precipitous mountain trail. 
The scenery is awesome—soaring pine trees, subtly colored outcroppings of ancient 
Precambrian rock, the occasional glimpse in the west of the Tonto Basin falling away 
over a thousand meters, green-black waves of forested hills and buttes rolling eastward. 
The abandoned gold mine, a sinister opening braced with rotting timbers, surrounded by 
rusting machinery and collapsed shacks, is passed by when the two dudes indicate they 
have no interest in stopping. 

Copper Mountain has no distinct summit; the laboring horses halt at last on a north-
facing shelf of bare rock girt with scrubby trees. Randy Herrero dismounts and comes to 
hold the heads of Paco and Bluebell so his clients can safely slip from their saddles. 

"Here y'go, Scotty, Al. This is the place! You can see damn near the entire Sky Ranch 
from here, right down on that plateau. Big house right by the creek, not seven kilometers 
away. Ranch buildings, corral, hopper pad, and control tower to the east, other buildings 
scattered from hell to breakfast. There's an old mule trail leading up from the ranch to the 
gold mine. The mountain's not so steep on the north slope. Of course, no outsiders are 
allowed to use the trail nowadays. You brought power oculars?" 

"I did," says the dude known as Al Smith. He produces them from his jacket and does 
a slow panoramic sweep. "Very impressive. I'm surprised the Frost family doesn't use a 
ground-based dissimulator to forestall spying. Or even a Class Three defensive shield." 

Randy laughs dismissively. "Why fuzzy up their own billion-dollar view? They own 
seven sections of land north of here, and it's fenced with high-tech alarms and overhead 
scans. No hoppers are going to drop in unexpected-like, either—not with the airspace 
monitored by hidden blaster emplacements. The buildings are out of range of any 
portable arms, so the Frosts don't give a damn about tourists horseback riding or hiking 
around the perimeter. But if you came up any of the surrounding mountains in a vehicle, 
Rampart ExSec would be all over you like flies on shit." 

"Seven sections of land?" The archaic measuring term is a puzzlement to Citizen 


Smith. 

"A section was a square mile in the old system," says the man called Scotty Jones 
with calm certainty. "Quite impregnable." 

"Imagine that," murmurs Smith. He resumes his observations through the 
powerscope. "Just imagine that!" 

The Doc-in-the-Box prescribed oxygen for the patient, together with a medication to 
relieve the convulsions. It urged us to transfer Jim Matsukawa to the nearest hospital. 

"We're only two hours out of Torngat," Joe Betancourt said. "I read up on the place 
during my last trick at the helm. The winter resort has a big medical facility. They must 
get a lot of broken bones, to say nothing of hypothermia and apres-ski hangovers." 

I said, "Matt and Ivor, you stay with the patient. I'm going to call ahead and see what 
kind of arrangements we can make. Joe, go drive the boat. Send Mimo to me in the 
wardroom." 

Back in my lair, I opened the SS com and made contact with Torngat Starport, 
declaring a medical emergency. The tower transferred me to an ER doctor at the local 
hospital and I transmitted data from our sick-bay computer to her. 

"The symptoms are most consistent with some sort of poisoning," she decided, after 
studying the information. "Was there any complaint of burning or numbness in the mouth 
and throat? Or abdominal pain?" 

"Absolutely not. Neither yesterday nor today." 

"Restlessness or thrashing about? Tremors? Headache?" 

"Negative." 

"Hmm. And you departed from the planet Cravat?" 

"Correct." 

She diddled with her own computer and her eyebrows rose. "Goodness! What an 
appalling little world ... However, the patient's symptoms don't correlate with any native 
toxic materials or bioagents. A pity you couldn't obtain a blood sample. Well, all I can 
say is, get him to us immediately." 

"Doctor, the man's a high-risk prisoner. It's imperative that we transport him to Earth 
without delay." I showed her my Rampart Red Card. "I'm empowered by my Starcorp to 
offer whatever compensation you deem necessary if you'll send medical personnel to 
treat the patient aboard our starship." 

She scowled. "I doubt it could be arranged." 

"Whatever compensation is required. To the hospital, officially, and privately to the 
staff members who agree to treat the patient." 

"Stand by," she said. 

Mimo came into the wardroom, one of his precious stogies clamped in his teeth. "So 
it's happened again." 

"Yes. He seemed well on the way to recovery, then—pow! It's got to be poison." • 

"But where would he have got it from?" Mimo said. "He could hardly have been 
carrying it around with him on Dagasatt, and he had no opportunity to obtain it on Cravat. 
He was constantly under guard." 

"It had to've been given to him here on the ship by our mystery fink. But I'll be 
damned if I know where he or she could have found the stuff. No chemical we have on 
board fits the medic computer's list of possible poisons, and you can't purchase controlled 
substances over the counter in a tightly wrapped settlement like Cravat. The odds are 


astronomical against there being a Gala agent hanging around Cravat Dome, equipped 
with a handy-dandy murder kit for the turncoat to pick and choose from." 

Mimo puffed fragrant smoke. "It's possible—but not plausible—that a disloyal crew 
member had poison in their possession from the very beginning of the operation, before 
we left Rampart Central on Seriphos. But this would make sense only if Oliver Schneider 
were the intended poisoning target. No one knew you would take Jim Matsukawa 
prisoner." 

"Right! Why poison Matsukawa to prevent his interrogation, and not Ollie? Both men 
are potentially dangerous witnesses against Galapharma." 

"But only Matsukawa is a possible demiclone," Mimo said. 

I chewed that one over and got nowhere. "Ildy, Joe, and Ivor were unaware of the 
precise goal of Operation Q when they first came aboard Chispa on Seriphos. Even on 
Nogawa-Krupp they didn't know we were after Oliver Schneider, or that we suspected 
him of being a Gala agent. Our target individual was merely described as a felonious 
Rampart employee. The only crew member other than myself who knew that Schneider 
was the prize was you." 

Mimo rolled his eyes. 

"God knows, I don't doubt your loyalty!" I hastened to add. "It has to be one of the 
others—or no one. Maybe the goddamn Haluk demiclones have hollow teeth full of 
assorted pharmaceuticals. Maybe Matsukawa's just highly allergic to Ivor's cooking!" 

"Citizen Frost?" The doctor was back on the com display. "If your corporation is 
prepared to pay through the nose, we can place a fully equipped medical gig, plus 
personnel, at your disposal. The gig is a rather sizable mobile hospital." She gave me its 
specs. 

"No problem!" I exclaimed. "Our starship's a big one. There's plenty of room for it in 
our auxiliary transport bay. If necessary, we'll leave our own gig behind on Torngat." 

"Very well. We'll be ready to lift when you arrive in parking orbit." She told me what 
the outrageous cost was going to be. I promised to arrange a prompt transfer of funds 
from Earth and thanked her profusely. We said goodbye. 

I turned to Mimo. "I was going to ask you to ready our or-biter to shuttle the patient if 
my little proposal was nixed. Now all you have to do is figure out if we can shoehorn the 
ambulance into Chispa's belly." 

"And of course there's Karl to pick up. Do you wish me to collect him and the others 
from Torngat?" 

I thought for a moment. "Let me give him a shout. It'd be best if they could hitch a 
ride on the medical gig. Check out available space in the transport bay as quickly as you 
can ... And I don't want Joe at the helm when we make our approach to the planet. Just 
keep him with you on the flight deck when you take command." 

He nodded and left me alone. 

I called Eve and arranged for the medical payoff, catching her in her Toronto 
apartment. 

She made the monetary transfer immediately, then said, "I've just had a bright idea: as 
soon as the Torngat medical team is aboard, I want you to have them do a DNA workup 
of both Matsukawa and Garth Lee. Transmit the data to me at once. Beatrice Mangan can 
analyze it. If they are modified Haluk, we'll know the genetic tag Emily Konigsberg 
incorporated into the demiclone procedure. If need be, we'll be able to test other 


suspicious individuals." 

"Of course! I should have thought of that myself." 

"You realize that the interrogation data from those two will be inadmissible as 
evidence until it's officially vetted by Xenoaffairs analysts. Until then, it's just 
intelligence. Furthermore, without a humanoid Haluk, dead or alive, the only substantive 
proof we have of an alien demiclone threat is my own little blue body—circumstantial 
evidence that could be interpreted variously—and your unsupported statement about 
nefarious activity on Dagasatt." 

"I know, Evie." 

"Take very good care of yourself, little brother. And of your prisoners." She signed 
off. 

I promptly put in a call to Karl Nazarian, on Torngat. 

The starbase's general astrogation office patched me through to the hotel where he 
and the three members of his crew and Garth Lee were staying. I greeted him and 
inquired how things were going. 

"We're holed up in the smallest, most bare-bones establishment I could find," he told 
me. "A transient spacers'joint just outside the starport where I can keep our prisoner 
secure and the crew out of mischief." 

The thought of finicky Lotte Dietrich, the dour old manhunter Cassius Potter, and 
laid-back Hector Motlaletsie carousing among the frozen fleshpots of Torngat made me 
smile. "Of course. Gotta protect your Over-the-Hill Gang from the temptations of snow 
bunnies and ski bums. How's Garth Lee?" 

"Glum and glummer. We're keeping a suicide watch on him." 

"Good thinking." I told him about the Fake Emily debacle back on Earth, and about 
our speculations, and hopes, that Lee and Matsukawa might also be demiclones. "I'll 
probe your boy Lee as soon as we get him aboard. We've had to postpone the 
interrogation of Matsukawa due to a suspiciously convenient illness. Maybe poison." 

"Ah." 

"He's in pretty dire shape and our diagnostic equipment failed to spot what was 
wrong. The gear could have been sabotaged. I think you might be right about us having a 
fink aboard." 

"What are you going to do about it?" 

"What I hoped to avoid. When you and your people are here to reinforce us, I'll probe 
Joe Betancourt and Ildiko Szabo. It's got to be one of them. Or nobody." 

"You coming down to fetch us, or you want me to take care oftransport?" 

"I've arranged for a medical gig to rendezvous with us in Torngat orbit a little under 
two hours from now. Matsukawa needs professional care." 

"So you're transferring him landside for treatment?" 

"No way. We'll be carrying the local sawbones crew and their space-going hospital 
along with us to Earth. I'm going to make certain that all of us arrive in good shape." 

"Wowie!" He hoisted his bushy brows in appreciation of the costly operation. "So you 
want me and my group to come aboard with the medics?" 

"That's an affirm. You can get details from Torngat Tower on the gig's takeoff. Go 
over there right away. We don't want to waste a minute getting our show back on the 
road. Crazy things are happening on the Rampart scene." 

"The repairs to Plomazo will be complete in a week," Karl said. "Shall I arrange to 


have her ferried to Earth?" 

"Hold off. We'll see what Mimo thinks." 

"All right. By the way, I've used our down-time here on Torngat to make a rough 
precis of relevant data abstracted by Lotte from Garth Lee's ship computer. You won't 
have to wade through the raw dump like poor Evie did—not that she has any reason to 
complain. The material we sent her is prima facie evidence of Galapharma's conspiracy to 
engage in illicit trade with the Haluk. Nothing about demiclones in the dump, though. 
And nothing to help Rampart's civil case." 

"Don't be too sure of that. My brother Daniel and his overpaid flock of legal eagles 
might just find a way to tweak that data to Rampart's advantage. Dan's a helluva lawyer. 
A regular Wile E. Coyote. Matter of fact, Eve used to call him that when we were kids to 
tease him." 

Karl looked puzzled, then nodded in sudden comprehension. "Wile E. Coyote! 
Classic movie cartoon character. Wasn't he always being outwitted by some speedy 
desert bird?" 

"The Roadrunner. There really is such a thing. They're fairly common in Arizona. I 
haven't thought about them in years." Or about the way Wily Dan Frost earned his 
nickname. 

Karl Nazarian said, "Helly, I'd better get this outfit of mine over to the starbase. See 
you soon." 

When he was gone, I sat staring at the dead SS display, carried away—as seemed to 
happen too often lately—to the wild western lands where my Frost ancestors carved out 
the first Sky Ranch in the late 1800s. 

Where my mother and father had honeymooned. Where I'd been accidentally born, a 
bit prematurely, attended not by the high-priced Toronto obstetrician as my parents had 
planned, but by the ranch's horse wrangler, who knew all about birthing baby animals. 
Where Dan and Eve and Beth and I spent marvelous early childhood holidays, pretending 
we were regular kids, not wealthy and overprivileged Frost offspring who'd someday 
inherit an interstellar corporation. 

I thought about how we camped and played cowboy with Pop, learned about minerals 
and wild animals and Native American history from Mom. I thought about canyons and 
rimrock and arid high-plateau forest beneath a blazing sun, tiny elf-owls peeking from 
holes dug out of tall saguaro cactuses, and roadrunners dashing along primitive dirt trails 
ahead of a lumbering four-wheeler. 

I thought about Mom and Dad together, before the estrangement and divorce that had 
turned them into Katje and Simon; and all of us kids, laughing and scrapping and liking 
each other. I thought about the way my family had been. 

The way it could never be again, especially if what I suspected was true. 

Matt Gregoire finally came to tell me that we'd reached the Torngat solar system and 
were ready to go subluminal. 

"How's Matsukawa?" I asked her. 

"Slightly worse." 

"Who's guarding Ollie Schneider?" 

She gave me a look. "At the moment, no one. He's still sleeping off the morning 
interrogation session. I've looked in on him once or twice and hooked the breath monitor 
alarm to my wrist unit. You told Mimo to keep Joe on the bridge. I thought it would be 


prudent if Ildiko stayed with me and Ivor." 

"You're right, of course." I shook my head. "Let me grab a cup of coffee before we go 
aft." 

After I'd helped myself at the wardroom dispenser, we went together to sick bay. The 
crossover flash gave us a split second of disorientation and momentarily whited-out the 
view through the corridor port. Then the stretched stars of hy-perspace turned back into 
steady colored lights on black velvet. In a few minutes we'd be in a parking orbit half a 
million kilometers above Torngat. The place was supposed to be a winter wonderland. 
Macrodur Concern, notorious for working its employees like serfs, also provided them 
with the most opulent vacation spots in the galaxy. The tactic was supposed to be very 
successful in promoting company loyalty... 

Ivor was bending anxiously over the patient when Matt and I got to sick bay. An 
appalling stench filled the room. 

"Jim suffered another convulsion and a violent bout of diarrhea," Ivor said. "He's 
unconscious. I administered medication as the computer ordered. Just a few minutes ago 
the Doc-in-the-Box advised that his respiration is faltering. As you can see, he's receiving 
oxygen, but the computer advises that he may need to be put on a ventilator. This is a 
highly technical procedure and I'm not sure that I—" 

"No," I said. "We'll hold off until a real doctor gets here with the proper equipment to 
diagnose Jim. It won't be long." 

"How about taking him to the transport bay?" Ildiko suggested. "Let the medics treat 
him right there, as soon as they dock. We have an antigrav gurney." 

"All right, that's a go," I decided. "Matt, get on your intercom and tell Mimo to notify 
the medical crew about the respiration problem." 

"Let me clean the poor man up before we try to move him," Ivor said, pulling on 
protective gloves. "Ildy, get a fresh gown from the locker for him and fix up the gurney. 
Helly, pull that wastebasket closer." 

The treatment couch allowed sluicing of the patient in situ. Ivor performed the task 
very efficiently, cutting off Jim's clothes and washing his soiled nether regions with a 
hose that sprayed warm water and disinfectant. The nearly liquid excrement swirled away 
as Ivor carefully turned the sick man's inert body. 

"Wait!" I shouted abruptly. "What the hell's that?" 

One of them got away down the drain, but Ivor's gloved hand, moving fast as 
lightning, snared the second. As we all came close, oblivious of the lingering stink, Ivor 
carefully washed the object. 

Ildiko provided a kidney dish to receive it. "It must have been in his rectum," she 
said. "Eeyuk!" 

"And not just one," I noted. "Two of them." 

Instructing Ivor to finish the wash job and place the patient on the gurney, I carried 
the kidney dish and its unusual contents to a table with a strong light. Ildiko furnished me 
with a face shield, gloves, forceps, and a pointed probe. Gingerly, I began to pull the 
thing apart. 

Matt, who had gone into the hall to take care of the message to Mimo, reentered the 
room to see what the fuss was about. "We're in orbit. The gig is on its way . .. Helly? 
What in the world have you got there?" 

"It looks like leaves!" Ildiko said. "Is it some alien organism?" 


The swollen, distorted roll was slightly over thirteen centimeters long. Slowly I took 
it apart, pulled off a piece, and held it against the light. It was part of a leaf, all right. 

"An alien from Havana," I said. 

Jim Matsukawa had prudently removed the bands before inserting two of them into 
his body, but I knew without a doubt that the object in the kidney dish was the sodden 
remains of one of Mimo's premium-quality Cohiba Robusto cigars. 

"Matsukawa is suffering from nicotine poisoning," I said, pulling off my gloves with 
a triumphant snap. "Administered nonorally. I should have remembered. It's one of those 
legendary prisoner dodges. A single cigarette makes you conveniently sick as a dog so 
you get a nice vacation in the hospital, and the evidence gets flushed." 

"That would have been what happened yesterday," Ivor said. "When I helped him to 
the toilet." 

"He used only one cigar then," I remarked thoughtfully. "He must have kept the 
unused ones in their plastic tubes, stashed up his exhaust pipe. The question is, why did 
he use two cigars today?" 

"To be sicker," Matt stated. "Hoping we'd evacuate him to Torngat, where his 
confederate might help him escape." 

Ivor said, "But Mimo keeps his cigars in a locked humidor." 

"Don't look at me," Ildiko said. "You know I smoked mine after dinner on our first 
night out of Cravat." 

Mart's face stiffened with sudden realization. "Joe Betan-court took three cigars in 
Terence Hoy's office. I don't remember him smoking any of them." 

"He could have slipped them to Jim in one of the coffee mugs," Ildy said. "Robustos 
are fairly short—when they're dry." 

Ivor's huge, gentle face was twisted with dismay. "Joe is the secret traitor? But that's 
not possible!" 

"Yes, it is," I said grimly. "And he's on the bridge with Mimo." I lifted my wrist 
intercom, then cursed my stupidity. "No. We can't warn Meem that way. Joe would hear 
it. We'll have to get some Ivanovs from the arms locker and take him by surprise." 

All of the portable weaponry had been secured for the duration of the voyage. Only 
Matt, Mimo, or I had access to the arsenal. 

I said, "Ivor, take Matsukawa to the transport bay anteroom. You two gals come with 
me." 

We dashed off down the long corridor, through the galley and the dining saloon, past 
the locked wardroom and the open crew lounge, where large ports on the starboard side 
showed Torngat, half lit, a lovely world with ice-dotted indigo seas and sparkling polar 
continents. 

A heavy door opened into the boarding vestibule, the midships excursion bay, and a 
cluster of equipment storage compartments. The arms locker was located in the forward 
section, not far from the short companionway leading to the flight bridge. 

Suddenly I froze in my tracks, and Matt and Ildiko crashed into me. 

The door to the bridge, about eight meters away, was sliding open. Joe Betancourt 
stood there, holding Mimo in a hammerlock. His right hand pressed a Henckels 14cm 
chef's boning knife into the soft area just above the old man's Adam's apple. 

I thought: A friggin' kitchen knife? Sweet Sue! 

But the low-tech weapon, honed sharp as a razor, was doing its job. Blood streamed 


down Mimo's neck and soaked the front of his white cashmere turtleneck. His dark eyes 
were wide and glazed and his mouth taut against the pain. 

"Hold it!" Joe shouted. "All of you stop right there or I'll kill him now!" 

"Okay, Joe. Whatever you say." I held up both hands in surrender but continued 
oozing slowly forward. The arms locker was less than three meters away, on my right. 

"Stand still! I mean it. I'll slit the old fucker's gizzard!" 

Blood was flowing freely from the wound in my friend's throat, but there was none of 
the deadly spurting that would have signified a cut artery. His eyes lost their fixed stare 
and focused on me. Very slowly, one of them closed. 

Yes! 

A hoarse groan from Mimo. "I'm sorry, Helly. He took me by surprise at the instant of 
hyperspace crossover. Ay, dios mio—que pendejada!" He began to quiver and slump, as 
though he were fainting. 

Joe gave the old man's locked arm a vicious wrench. "Stand up, you bastard! Keep 
walking! And shut your mouth. One more word and you're dead." 

Mimo obeyed, and winked at me again. He certainly wasn't as badly injured as he 
seemed to be. 

I was still moving. "Take it easy, Joe. Don't hurt him any more. We'll do whatever 
you want—" 

I feigned tripping over my own feet, falling headlong to the deck and twisting to the 
right. Mimo's knees gave way and he and his captor lurched precariously. Joe was a 
powerful little guy, but the veteran smuggler was a full head taller, gangly as a stork and 
an awkward burden when he was a dead weight. 

Joe screamed, "Goddamn you!" and pulled Mimo backward, cussing a blue streak. As 
I'd hoped, he thought I was trying to get close enough to jump him. But my actual goal 
was the arms locker. There was no time to open it and grab a gun. All I could do was 
prevent Betancourt from obtaining a more efficient weapon, praying he wouldn't make 
good on his threat to slaughter his sagging captive. I rolled, bounced to my feet, and 
ended up with my face plastered against the iridocontrolled lock, a mechanism that only 
Mimo, Matt, or I could open... or close. 

Eyeballing the lock, I said, "Emergency code alpha-three-one-one." 

The thing chimed loudly five times. I sprang away, waiting for Joe's next move. 

"Cocksucking sonuvabitch!" he roared. "What've you done? What?" 

I hoped he'd drop Mimo and come at me with the knife. If he had, I'd have booted his 
teensy testicles up between his ears and cracked his wrist like a celery stalk. But he 
caught himself in time, still spewing obscenities, and maintained a firm grip on his 
hostage's locked arm, which he'd pulled so high that I feared it might be dislocated. 

Mimo was on his knees, head down, moaning loudly. Joe had shifted the thin, sharply 
pointed knife from his throat to the base of his skull. 

A shuddering inhalation, then Joe spoke almost in a whisper, squelching his fury with 
a heroic self-control I had to admire. 

"If I stab Mimo in this spot, he's gone. With a slashed throat, he might have a chance 
if you overpower me—but not with a cut brainstem. Understand? Understand?" 

"Yes." I straightened and slowly placed my hands on top of my head. 

"What did you do to the arms cabinet?" he asked me. "An emergency lock-down?" 

I nodded. "Twenty-four hours. No override." 


"You're lying! I'll kill Mimo right now. I mean it!" 

"I'm telling the truth," I said. "And if you kill him you'll lose the only edge you have. 
So quit with the bullshit and ease up before he has a heart attack." 

Joe Betancourt glared at me, breathing roughly. Then he relaxed the pressure on 
Mimo's hammerlocked arm. The old man gave a sob of relief and looked at me with a 
crooked smile. "I tried, amigo." "Shut up," Joe said. "On your feet, gramps!" Mimo 
complied, wincing. The knife was still pointed at the nape of his neck. 

"You two!" Joe jerked his head at Matt and Ildiko, who had remained unmoving at 
the far end of the compartment. "Into the excursion bay. Now!" 

I went rigid. Properly sequenced, the chamber opened onto airless space. "You 
sawed-off asswipe! If you intend to—" 

Joe's voice was almost weary. "I don't kill people without a reason, Frost, believe it or 
not. I just want to get 'em out of the way." To the women: "Move it, bitches!" 

They sidled into the bay, their faces expressionless. I said, "What about me?" "I need 
you. Close 'em up." 

There was nothing I could do but obey. He had me disable the safety control that 
would have let the women free themselves. 

"Okay," he said. "Now back to the equipment maintenance compartment. Make it 
quick." 

Above one of the workbenches was a supply cabinet, and residing therein was my 
nemesis of old—duct tape. This roll was in a dispenser with a clipper, very handy. Joe 
ordered me to rig my ankles with improvised shackles, leaving a twisted length of tape 
about forty centimeters long as a connecting hobble. My wrists were next. I bound them 
loosely but effectively in a web of sticky stuff until Joe was satisfied. I wasn't helpless, 
but I sure was mightily discommoded. 

"Carry the tape with you," Joe commanded. Then we headed aft. 

"Satisfy my curiosity," I said as I ambled along. "Were you a Galapharma plant from 
the beginning, or did they recruit you somewhere along the way?" 

"The latter." He'd regained his composure. "When you sent me to destroy the Haluk 
starship approaching Dagasatt, I screwed up. Misjudged my ULD micromaneuvering 
capability during the initial hostile intercept. The Haluk ship was a real schusser, damn 
near as good as mine. I did him some damage, but then he got a fix on me and I knew I 
was dead meat. But instead of wiping me out, the bandit wanted to make a deal. Talk 
about a shocker! He was a human, just like I told you. And he recognized Chispa as his 
own stolen star-ship. I guess that's why he got the drop on me. He knew the crate's 
capabilities better than I did." 

"Did the pilot of the Haluk ship identify himself?" 

"It was Erik Skogstad, like you thought, a guy with a big blond mustache. He offered 
me a heap of Galapharma boodle—twenty times what you were paying me—if I'd help 
get Ollie Schneider away from you. Alive. He had to be alive. Old Erik was really 
worried that you'd kill Schneider rather than give him up. After I accepted the deal, 
Skogstad made the transfer of funds to my account right then and there. Hey! I was in no 
position to refuse, was I?" 

"Mercy, no!" I said disgustedly. "And did you set up Karl Nazarian for the chop, 
too?" 

"Skogstad wanted to know what happened to Garth Lee, the guy who'd been driving 


his ship when you swiped it. On the way to Nogawa-Krupp, I eavesdropped on you and 
Mimo when you were talking about that in the messroom. You hadn't been completely 
up-front about the mission during the briefing earlier on, and I wanted to know what we 
were up against. I had a right, dammit!" 

"So you told Skogstad what you knew about Lee?" 

"Yep. That he was being taken to Earth by a guy named Karl Nazarian, in a Bodascon 
Y660 that belonged to Ber-mudez, and that Nazarian probably left Seriphos the same 
time we did." 

Galapharma, using its multitudinous contacts in the Orion Arm, had tracked Karl's 
ship down and tried to destroy it. Their failure had led to an even more fortuitous chain of 
circumstances. 

I said, "So you made your deal and returned to Dagasatt. And Skogstad limped back 
to his Haluk base." 

"I guess so. He said there were no other high-end Haluk fighters close enough to call 
in. He seemed certain you'd grab Ollie Schneider, send out a shout for Zone Patrol and 
the Rampart cavalry, and head for Cravat with the prisoner. When we got to Cravat, I was 
supposed to contact Tyler Baldwin, Gala's security chief in Toronto, via SS com. Tell 
him the situation and get further orders." He paused and his tone darkened. "I think 
Skogstad might have tried to double cross me. A big Haluk cruiser attacked Chispa in the 
Dagasatt system before we could pick up you and Ildy. Mimo took over the guns and 
clobbered it, but I got to thinking." "About time! You're an idiot if you trust 
Galapharma." "I've been paid in advance," he assured me cockily. "And just in case Gala 
has a second double cross in mind, I have a little surprise planned when it comes time to 
hand over the prisoners." 

"Does it have anything to do with cigars?" I inquired. He gave an unsteady laugh. "So 
you know about the Cohibas! Rotten way to treat a good smoke, hey? But the gimmick 
worked just fine and dandy. Funny thing, though. Baldwin really came down hard on me 
about wanting Mat-sukawa kept alive but not interrogated. I practically offered to snuff 
Jimbo for him, but he wouldn't have it. He didn't seem to care whether or not you grilled 
Ollie." 

Something didn't quite compute in the proctological scenario, but I couldn't figure out 
what it was. I would have tried to get more details about Matsukawa's importance to 
Galapharma, but at that point we reached sick bay and found it empty. Joe knew we'd 
planned to take Matsukawa to the transport anteroom, so we continued on in that 
direction. Mimo was quiet, walking steadily enough even though he left a bloody trail. 
Joe had made a few shallow cuts at the back of his neck to keep his attention. 

I wondered morosely whether Galapharma fighting ships were already sharing our 
orbit, hiding behind dissimulator fields until it was time to close in. They'd nab a real 
prize package, thanks to treacherous Joe Betancourt. Not only Ollie, Jim, and Garth 
Lee—but also the Great White Hope of Rampart Starcorp: me. Without even knowing it, 
little Joe was about to write the finish to our corporate comedy. When the Gala goons 
killed me offhandedly, Rampart would go belly-up. 

Because I had no will. 

The last one I'd made, leaving everything to my former wife, Joanna DeVet, was 
automatically invalidated when I first lost my citizenship. According to CHW law, with 
me newly enfranchised and enriched, if I should die intestate, my quarterstake would be 


divided equally among my closest surviving relatives—Simon, Dan, Eve, and Bethany. 
Only Eve would vote with Simon against the merger. The others— including, I was sure, 
my vacillating Aunt Emma—would vote in favor, producing the fifty-fifty stalemate that 
would give Drummond his victory. 

You say it's my own fault? That I was a sentimental moron to take Joe and Ildy along 
on the voyage when I suspected one of them might betray us? 

Well, you'd be absolutely correct. But I couldn't have done anything else. 

 

 

Chapter 14 

 

Ivor Jenkins was shocked at the sight of us—me enmeshed in sticky silvery strips, 
poor bloodied Mimo, and gore-smeared, manic Joe Betancourt, who sang out with false 
cheeriness: 

"Step away from the patient, big fella! I've got a knife ready to puncture Mimo's 
lizard-brain if you make one false move." 

"He's right, Ivor," I warned. "Do as he says." 

"Back against the bulkhead and put your wrists together," Joe commanded. "That's 
good. Helly, you strap him up." 

The young giant stood in appalled silence while I fumbled with the duct-tape 
dispenser. It didn't matter that the strips weren't applied especially tight. Joe made me 
wind at least ten meters of the super-tough tape around Ivor's hands. When I finished, he 
looked like his paws were embedded in a silver basketball. 

After Ivor sat down, I taped his mouth and lashed his ankles closely together, leaving 
him immobilized. 

"Excellent," said Joe. He cast his eyes around the transport bay anteroom. The entire 
right side comprised a docking control console with communicators and monitoring 
equipment. To the left was a rack holding three space excursion suits and some other 
technical gear. The room had a big observation window, and beside it was the hatch 
giving access to the airlock and the passenger lift to the transport bay. 

Chispa's orbiter gig, golden in color to match its elegant mothership, was parked well 
out of the way of the huge exterior iris gate so that the ambulance craft would have plenty 
of room to dock. A few maintenance bots stood at the ready to secure the visitor, and the 
bay was brightly floodlit with xenon lamps. 

"Now power up this com unit," Joe told me, "and let's see if the quacks are coming 
down the pike on schedule." 

The console had a movable swivel chair. I said, "For God's sake, let Mimo sit down. 
He's wrecked." 

"Okay. You stand aside." 

When I did so, Joe dragged the old man up off his knees and allowed him to collapse 
into the seat. Mimo's eyes were crusty black slits. His head with its crown of frowsy hair 
periodically lolled onto his breast, and both skinny arms hung impotently at his sides. His 
skin was the color of wood ashes. Crimson streaks defiled his sweater and pants. 

Keeping the knife in place, Joe rolled Mimo to a position as far away from me and 
Ivor as he could manage. "You know better than to say anything smart," he told me. "Get 
the medical gig on the viewer, but keep our video pickup turned off. Hail them and 


explain that we've had a com malfunction, but everything else is peachy-keen. Except the 
patient, of course." 

The tape manacles didn't really hamper my use of the equipment. An impressive red-
and-white gig emblazoned with the legend TORNGAT EMERGENCY SPACE-MEDICAL 
RESPONSE appeared on the scan monitor. It was nearly on top ofus. 

The ship-to-ship interior display showed a distinguished-looking man with a silver 
Afro and one of the meanest purple snarls I've ever seen. He was wearing a coverall that 
looked more military than medical and a nameplate I couldn't quite make out. 

"It's about time you came back to us, Chispa Dosl" he said furiously. "We've been 
trying to raise you for fifteen minutes. What's wrong with your video feed?" 

"A small malfunction. I apologize. I'm Asahel Frost, Vice President of Rampart 
Starcorp. Who are you, sir?" 

"Dr. Ben Harrison Crystal, medical team commander. What's the status of your 
patient?" 

"He's still in critical condition. We've positively determined that he's suffering from 
nicotine poisoning." I described the mode of administration, and the doctor rolled his 
eyes heavenward. "We've brought the patient to the transport bay so you can take him 
into your vessel for treatment just as soon as you dock." 

"Satisfactory. We're matching orbits. Open up." 

I clumsily hit the proper control pads. Flashing lights and alarm Klaxons activated in 
the transport bay. Air vented, the exterior sounds cut off abruptly, and the great gate into 
space opened like a monster's mouth, revealing the orbiter hanging expectantly in a star-
spangled night. 

It wafted inside, gave a little skip when it hit our graviton field, and landed right on 
the bull's-eye. The bots converged to clamp it down and zap it with decon radiation, the 
gate closed, and I hit the control calling for rapid recompression. Alarm lights flashed 
again. After a moment we could hear the ooh-gahs and the hissing roar of air rilling the 
bay. 

Dr. Crystal was still on the monitor. His aspect was one of stony anger, and a few 
beads of perspiration dotted his caramel forehead. Maybe he'd been dragooned into 
accepting the unorthodox assignment and was piqued at missing time on the ski slopes. 

I checked the safety displays. The bay environment was atmospheric and temperate. I 
said, "Would you prefer to supervise the transfer of the patient from our control room, 
Doctor?" 

He looked questioningly at someone beyond scan range. Then: "No. Bring him down 
to us." 

"May I ask whether you have the Karl Nazarian party aboard?" 

"No, you may not ask," said Ben Harrison Crystal. Then he cut me off. 

"Well, you have yourself a nice day!" I muttered, and turned to Betancourt for further 
orders. 

Joe said, "Open the broadband hail frequency." 

"So you can call in Galapharma?" 

"I'll let you do the honors, shitheel. They've gotta be around here somewhere. Give 
'em a shout." 

I spoke to the communicator. "Starship Chispa Dos is calling any Galapharma AC 
vessel in the Torngat solar-system. Come back, Galapharma." 


The ship-to-ship monitor went to white in an audio-only reply. They were playing the 
same game we'd played with the medical gig. 

"Galapharma responding. Go to Secure Channel 6892Z." 

I did the switch, and the Invisible Man said, "Stand by for instructions." 

"Chispa acknowledges." 

A long silence ensued. 

"Yo, Gala?" I caroled. "You want to tell us what to do next?" 

After an interval the Invisible Man came back. "Uh—load the patient James 
Matsukawa onto the medical gig and wait for instructions. Be aware that your vessel is 
under our guns." 

"We will comply." I silenced the transmitter and said to Betancourt, "Looks like you 
might have a bunch of confused clowns out there." 

"Or they're planning to get cute," he growled. "But I'm ahead of 'em! You're going to 
haul Jim down into the transport bay. I'm staying right here." He grinned at me. "My ace 
in the hole is Schneider, in case you haven't already guessed. Gala can snatch Jim and 
that guy Garth Lee off the medical gig any time they feel like it. But they don't get their 
hands on Ollie until the loose ends are tidied up and I'm able to zorch on out of here with 
my skin in one piece." 

He pushed Mimo's chair closer to the bay airlock hatch, which was now wide-open. 
The boning knife glittered in the old man's hair and a fresh welling of blood oozed from 
the rear of his turtleneck. His head was nearly in his lap, and I decided he must have lost 
consciousness. 

I took hold of the rear tiller of the antigrav gurney and pushed it through to the open 
platform elevator that would carry us down into the bay. Matsukawa was neatly covered 
with blankets. His nostrils were stoppered with little tubes 

feeding him oxygen, and a tiny vital-signs monitor was stuck to his forehead. I could 
see his chest rising and falling. His face looked peaceful. Maybe expelling the cigars had 
saved his life. 

Who are you, Jimbo? I wondered. Why does Galapharma want to keep you quiet? 
The Dagasatt facility's no secret anymore, and Gala certainly has no idea you're a 
demiclone—if you are one. So why didn't Ty Baldwin just tell Joe to kill you if your 
silence is so important? 

I hit the elevator descent pad and started down. Joe Betan-court remained standing in 
the airlock doorway behind Mimo's chair, watching me. 

Below, the medical gig was still buttoned up tight. Vague shapes were visible on its 
bridge. I made the short trip across the deck and halted with my burden half a dozen 
meters from the main egress hatch of the ambulance. 

For a long moment nothing happened. Then the hatch cracked and lowered on its 
pistons. Dr. Ben Harrison Crystal came down the ramp, accompanied by two technicians 
carrying complicated-looking medical equipment. 

Following after them were four soldiers in full fighting armor and helmets. They held 
Claus-Gewitter photon beamers, the marksman's weapon of choice for precision zapping. 

The tallest of the troopers asked me, "Are you Betancourt?" 

"No. I'm Asahel Frost. Betancourt's standing up there in the airlock door, behind the 
guy in the swivel chair." 

Cheeow! 


What in hell? 

I instinctively dived to the deck as the trooper fired right over my head. Lying there in 
shock, I waited for a second laser beam to fry me dead. 

"Get up, Frost." 

The big shooter stood there impassively, his weapon at port. The other soldiers were 
hanging back as the doctor and his associates bent over Matsukawa and performed some 
kind of medical procedure, ignoring the fireworks. I got onto my knees, then shambled 
upright and risked a quick peek at the anteroom doorway above. Mimo was still there, 
sitting up. There was no sign of Joe Betancourt. 

So much for the turncoat pilot's insurance! I wondered if Ollie Schneider's policy 
would still work when the Gala troops got their hands on him. 

"Frost!" the shooter said to me. "Is that orbiter gig of yours over there locked?" 

"It's wide-open. We don't have thieves aboard—only Galapharma scumbags." 

"Is your gig fueled and ready?" 

"Yes." I figured he'd disable it before leaving so we couldn't use it to escape. When 
the ambulance was clear of Chispa, the shooter's buddies in the Gala fighting ships would 
energetically disassemble us with their cannons. Karl Nazarian and his crew were 
probably already dead. 

I decided to try a last bluff. "You listen to me! My other friends up in the control 
anteroom will kill Oliver Schneider unless you back off. That happens, you'll be in the 
soup, buster." 

The big guy laughed. 

"This is no joke! Haven't you been told that Schneider has hidden evidence that could 
ruin Galapharma? He dies, the incriminating poop gets released. You better check with 
your high command." 

He lifted his helmet visor, revealing a beefy face adorned with pale eyebrows, a 
white-blond walrus mustache, and a sardonic smile. "That's not necessary. You can keep 
Citizen Schneider—with the compliments of Tyler Baldwin. The game plan has 
changed." 

"Erik Skogstad, I presume. How'd you get here so fast? Steal yourself a new Y700?" 

The smile faded. "This time, you get a pass. But God help the lot of you if Baldwin's 
brother dies from that shit you gave him." 

"Brother?" I repeated stupidly. 

But the puzzle pieces were about to fall into place. 

He turned away and shouted an order in an alien language, 

one I'd last heard spoken in a secret laboratory below the noxious jungles of Cravat. 
Belatedly, I noticed that the three other troopers were wearing armor that was 
conspicuously wasp-waisted. They escorted the medical party and the patient into the gig. 

Skogstad prodded my chest with his blaster. "Go back to the control room now, 
Asahel Frost. When we have both gigs secured for liftoff, open the bay gate. Don't 
attempt to interfere with us." 

He strode off in the direction of Chispa's orbiter, and I went galumphing to the 
elevator, my head awhirl with wild speculation. At the top I found an empty swivel chair 
and the body of Joe Betancourt. He had a great big smoldering third nostril right above 
the other two. 

Mimo was bending over Ivor, sawing away feebly with the Henckels boning knife at 


the ball of tape imprisoning the giant's hands. "Something very peculiar is going on," he 
observed in a quavering voice. 

"Damn right," I agreed. "But I think I'm starting to get a handle on it. Give me that 
knife and sit down before you fall down." 

He subsided onto the deck, leaning against the excursion suit rack. "Que gacho—I'm 
getting too old for this sort of thing." 

I ripped the tape from Ivor's mouth, finished cutting his hands loose, and freed my 
own. I gave Ivor the knife, telling him to cut the tape from his own ankles and then from 
mine. 

Outside in the bay, both gigs had their navigation lights shining, ready to go. Sealing 
our airlock hatches—Joe's body and the chair were still inside—I slapped the emergency 
de-pressurization switch. The transport bay filled with fog for a split second and then 
held only clear vacuum. 

Ivor was working on my fetters, but I was too busy to notice. The iris gate opened and 
both of the orbiters zipped away into space. I acquired them on the exterior scanner... 

And saw on the viewer what I'd halfway expected to see. 

A titanic starship was waiting out there, its eleven-kilometer length blotting out the 
stars behind it. It looked like a warty acorn with a fancy dagger poked through it. The 
acorn was surmounted by a glowing blue dome, and the hilt of the dagger was studded 
with gemlike azure ports. 

Mimo was studying the viewer with awe. " Vaya por dios— ese es el Meromero de 
los Haluk!" 

He was right. It was the same immense alien vessel that had come to the Kedge-
Lockaby system to rescue Bronson Elgar and maroon me on Helly's Comet, the flagship 
of the Haluk top dog, the Servant of the Servants of Luk. 

The big ship's transport bay opened and both gigs disappeared inside. 

"Will they destroy us now?" Ivor asked quietly. 

"I'm not sure," I replied. "As Mimo said, something peculiar is going on." 

"Where are Matt and Ildy?" Mimo asked me. 

"Safe enough. Joe made me lock them in the midships excursion bay but he didn't 
evacuate the air." 

"But all this makes no sense," the old smuggler grumbled. 

"I misjudged the situation," I said, "and so did Joe Betancourt. It wasn't Galapharma 
who turned Joe and came chasing after us. It was the Haluk. 1 suspect that the aliens set 
up Karl's ambush as well, maybe using Gala fighting ships." 

"Oh, my goodness," said Ivor. "Haluk demiclones in the Galapharma forces?" 

"You got it, kid. Joe told me he was recruited by a Gala agent named Erik Skogstad. 
Erik drove the Haluk ship I sent Joe to destroy—only Erik won that dogfight, and gave 
Joe the choice of betraying us or dying. Guess who was in charge of the bandit boarding 
party just now, and gave Little Joe his final kiss-off." 

"Erik Skogstad?" Ivor hazarded. 

"Go to the head of the class," I said. "He probably came in on the Haluk flagship and 
intercepted the medical gig. When I talked to him, he implied that his specific mission 
was to rescue Jim Matsukawa—Ty Baldwin's brother." 

"But I've seen images of this Baldwin in certain databases pertinent to my former 
profession," Mimo protested. "He is surely a Caucasoid, while Matsukawa seemed to be 


wholly of Oriental ancestry. Unless the brothers were adopted, or were—" He pulled up 
short in sudden comprehension, spitting a Mexican expletive. 

"Brothers under the skin," I said. "Or rather, under the human DNA." 

And now I knew the fourth person Matsukawa had called from Dagasatt during my 
assault. 

"Both of them Haluk!" said Mimo wildly. "Skogstad, perhaps Garth Lee and Bronson 
Elgar as well! Dios—are any of Gala's Perseus Spur personnel still human?" 

I said, "What I'd like to know is, how many ringers besides Tyler Baldwin have 
infiltrated critical Big Seven Concern positions within the Orion Arm?" 

Ivor said, "Do you suppose Alistair Drummond has knowingly cooperated in the 
demiclone substitution scheme?" 

"Hardly. The asshole had no idea what kind of can of worms he was opening when he 
began his illegal trading with the Haluk. They're smart, dammit! They pulled the wool 
over Gala's eyes—not only with the demiclone thing, but also with the larger trading 
conspiracy. Gala and its Big Seven allies sold small numbers of advanced starships and 
other high technology to the Haluk at inflated prices. The Haluk took the stuff and 
studied it. Then they built more, only they improved on the originals." 

"As the ancient Japanese did," Ivor remarked sagely, "when they first encountered 
Western technology after centuries of isolation." 

"How else could that monster flagship out there have kept pace with us on our trip 
from the Perseus Spur?" I asked rhetorically. "Do you two remember the sophisticated 
Haluk gunship that attacked us when we were on the way to Cravat? It was head and 
shoulders above the usual heaps used by their pirates. They've kept their snazzy new 
starships under wraps. They probably don't have very many of them yet, just as they don't 
have many demiclones. The Haluk are biding their time, just as I was afraid they—" 

"Look!" Ivor cried in disbelief. "Our orbiter is returning." 

"Holyfrijole" I murmured. 

We waited. I tried to hail the approaching gig but no one responded. Eventually the 
little spacecraft reentered our open iris gate and docked. 

"Well," I said with a grimace, "let's see if they sent us a lovely present or an 
antimatter bomb." 

I secured the gate and repressurized the bay. When the warning lights and Klaxons 
shut down, the gig's hatch opened. Karl Nazarian emerged, followed by Lotte Dietrich, 
Hector Motlaletsie, and Cassius Potter. Presumably, the Haluk had kept back their 
beamish boy, Garth Lee. 

"They've let Karl and his people go!" Ivor exclaimed. "But why?" 

I recalled what Skogstad had told me. "Maybe because the game plan has changed." 

Then I thought about the unthinkable notion that my sister Eve had so glibly proposed 
as part of the venture-credit prospectus to Macrodur: Rampart already owned another 
rozkoz, a commodity with the potential for generating unlimited profits for the Starcorp 
and its trading partners. All we needed was a new treaty with the Haluk, so they would 
become a legitimate market for the genetic engineering vector PD32:C2. 

"It's just possible," I said to my friends, "that the Haluk know something that we 
don't. Something that's caused a one-eighty switch in their strategy." 

The newcomers had ascended the elevator. Karl Nazarian was pounding on the 
airlock door, so flushed with excitement I was afraid he'd have a stroke. I hurried to let 


him and the others in. 

"Helly, I'm flabbergasted!" Karl roared. "Do you have any idea what the flaming hell 
is going on? The medical gig was intercepted by this unbelievably huge Haluk starship—
" 

"There were humans aboard her!" Hector Motlaletsie spluttered. "Collaborators! They 
took us prisoner." 

"I know," I said. "Are any of you hurt?" 

"No," Lotte Dietrich said coolly. "The bastards took my e-books, but I had backup 
data-dimes stashed in my bottle of whiffenpoppers." 

Ivor giggled. 

Cassius Potter caught sight of bloodied Mimo. "Nothing wrong with us. But it sure 
looks like somebody messed up Bermudez. Shouldn't we be giving him first aid? And 
who the hell is that dead man in the airlock?" 

All four of them began nattering at the top of their lungs, while Mimo and I tried to 
explain. We were all a little crazy at that point. 

In the midst of the hullabaloo, Ivor pointed at the external viewer and said in a loud 
voice, "The Haluk starship is breaking orbit." 

Silence. 

"Well," said Cassius, with sour satisfaction, "if they intend to blast us to bits, I reckon 
they'll do it now." 

Lotte crossed herself. 

The monster vessel came about with surprising agility. We watched its SLD power 
units brighten, sixteen of them paired along the "blade" of the daggerlike structure, and 
then it soared away. An instant later the dazzling flash of hyperspatial crossover marked 
the Haluk ship's transition to ultraluminal drive. It was irrevocably gone. 

"How strange," Ivor marveled. "Not that I'm complaining . .." 

"Folks," I addressed the gathering, "I think we'd better be on our way, too." 

Anticlimactically, we scattered. I sent Karl and Hector to check on Ollie Schneider. 
Lotte and Ivor took Mimo to the sick bay. Cassius Potter and I went forward to rescue 
Matt and Ildy. In less than thirty minutes we had resumed our voyage to Earth. 

When we were safely away from the Torngat system, I reported the abduction of the 
medical team "by Haluk pirates" to Macrodur security and to Sector Zone Patrol. Both 
were disinclined to believe my story until I submitted our edited audiovisual record of the 
immense flagship engulfing the two gigs, after which there was a furious exchange of 
subspace messages. 

A certain Commander Newton at patrol HQ demanded that we return to Torngat at 
once for psychotronic examination. I said, regretfully, that that would not be 
convenient— citing obscure statutes relating to the rights of sovereign corporations 
operating in deep space—but promised to transmit formal depositions concerning the 
incident from all witnesses aboard Chispa just as soon as we could get ourselves 
organized. 

The cops threatened to come after us. (As a mere Starcorp, Rampart had less political 
clout than Macrodur Concern, which was screaming bloody murder.) I suggested that 
patrol efforts might be better directed toward analyzing the fuel signature of the Haluk 
pirate vessel and tracking it down before it escaped the sector. I also pointed out to 
Commander Newton that our Y700 was faster—and better armed—than any patrol 


cruiser. We had done our civic duty by reporting the abduction, transmitting a holo of the 
perp flagrante delicto, and affirming that we'd submit statements. Now we were 
determined to go on about our legitimate corporate business without interference. 

Newton bitched, blustered, and bluffed. I stood firm while dazzling him with 
fusillades of legal precedents and other official red tape. (Not for nothing had I earned the 
degree of Juris Doctor from Harvard Law School back in the days when Simon assumed 
I'd become a Rampart exec. My years in the ICS had also taught me a thing or two about 
bureaucratic arm-twisting.) 

Zone Patrol finally backed off, just as I knew it would. In the Commonwealth of 
Human Worlds, sadly enough, civil authorities almost always deferred to Big Business. 

The following days were a time of regrouping, of cleaning up loose ends, and of busy 
intercommunication between Chispa and Earth. 

In a brief, informal ceremony, we consigned Joe Betan-court's body to the ship's 
matter converter, then voided his elements into hyperspace. I couldn't remember which of 
the Circles of Hell Dante set aside for his ancient group of traitors, but the uncanny 
emptiness between the spatial dimensions seemed a likely enough resting place for our 
modern-day Judas. 

Matt and I concluded the interrogation of Oliver Schneider two days later and 
transmitted the data to Eve. She assured us that Rampart lawyers were putting the final 
touches to the civil suit against Galapharma. There was much moaning and gnashing of 
teeth on the part of Zed, Dan, and the other Gala partisans on the Board of Directors who 
counseled delay, but Simon would brook no ass-dragging. It was his contention that filing 
the suit against Gala immediately would enhance Rampart's image as a dynamic outfit in 
the eyes of Macrodur's Chairman, Adam Stanislawski. It didn't hurt that old Adam also 
hated Alistair Drummond's cojones. 

Prompted by intimations of mortality, I made a new will, bequeathing my 
quarterstake and the rest of my worldly goods to Simon, instructing him to have Dan 
register it through Rampart's legal department so it would be a matter of public record. I 
figured—naively, as it turned out—that if the bad guys knew that Simon would own a 
clear majority of the shares upon my death, I myself and the other members of my family 
would be safe from intimidation or physical threat. 

Matt took formal depositions from all of us concerning our encounter with the Haluk 
flagship, then sent a transcript to Commander Newton at Zone Patrol. We couldn't 
conceal Joe Betancourt's role in the incident, nor that of Jim Matsukawa; but we did our 
best to keep their motivation murky. I stated truthfully that it was Betancourt who told me 
to send a broadband summons to Galapharma. The subsequent appearance of the alien 
ship was a shocking surprise to me. (Semi-truthful, but close enough.) My verbal 
description of the boarding encounter was brief and chock full of holes. Fortunately, 
neither Mimo nor Ivor had been in a position to contradict it. 

In a sidebar statement, not under oath, I regretted that I'd failed to activate 
surveillance cameras in the transport bay while the pirates were aboard Chispa. In 
mitigation, I reminded Zone Patrol that I'd been under considerable stress at the time. 

Karl and his people said nothing in their depositions about the presence of Garth Lee 
aboard the Torngat gig. None of the recorded material revealed it, either. My crew loyally 
declared that they "could not speculate" upon why the Haluk had kidnapped Jim 
Matsukawa and the medics. 


Commander Newton told me that our depositions left a lot to be desired. I thanked 
him for his opinion and referred any subsequent official queries to the Rampart legal 
department. 

It was a foregone conclusion that Macrodur would submit a formal complaint against 
the Haluk to Xenoaffairs. There was nothing we could do about that. It seemed likely, 
however, that SXA would bury the beef, as they had the Tokyo Haluk research, for 
unfathomable reasons of policy. Even if the secretariat did decide to take action, nothing 
was likely to happen for weeks—or even months. 

I sent Eve a copy of the Zone Patrol transcript, along with an uncensored postscript 
filling in the blanks. The evidence, I told her rather snidely, could join the growing 
collection in her secret Haluk files, until she decided to reveal it. 

Neither my sister nor I had the faintest notion how to turn the Tyler Baldwin 
blockbuster to Rampart's advantage. The demiclone Gala security chief was no doubt 
following an agenda of his own. Only time would tell whether it favored Galapharma and 
the ambitions of Alistair Drummond, or whether some convoluted sea-change had 
occurred among the aliens. 

The rest of our voyage to Earth was relatively uneventful. 

Mimo Bermudez healed rapidly and consumed the remainder of his Cohiba Robustos 
without sharing, citing therapeutic priorities. He used his convalescence to practice on the 
guitar and become better acquainted with his magnificent new starship. Meanwhile, he 
ordered Plomazo to be ferried back to Kedge-Lockaby after repairs were completed. 

Karl Nazarian, Cassius Potter, and Hector Motlaletsie took over piloting duties, 
giving the rest of us welcome leisure. They seemed relieved that they would not be asked 
to undertake any serious clandestine operations while on Earth, and delighted to learn 
they would receive a generous combat allowance in addition to their other pay. 

Matt Gregoire communicated with her office on Seriphos, smoothed out the final 
rough areas of the Dagasatt flap—at least so far as Zone Patrol was concerned—and dealt 
with other professional matters that had come up during her absence. Kindly and firmly, 
she refused to sleep with me. Not even a charity fuck. I told her I understood, then went 
and thought about how I might bury Alistair Drummond before he buried me. It was 
better than a cold shower. 

Lotte Dietrich commandeered the galley and ousted Ivor Jenkins from his post as chef 
de cuisine. Waist-broadening schnitzel, sauerbraten, strudel, torten, pies, cookies, and 
other "comfort food" invaded our formerly health-conscious menu, to the delighted 
horror of one and all. As Karl said, we all needed a little Christmas out of season. Or 
Hanukkah or Kwanzaa, as the case may be. 

No longer plagued by the Inquisition, Ollie Schneider studied e-books of notable 
vacation worlds, trying to decide where he'd live after he was set free—if he was set 
free—in the plea bargain arrangement. He proved to be a formidable poker player. Even 
Mimo got skinned. 

All of the crew members speculated volubly about what they would do when we 
reached our journey's end and they were finally at leisure. Matt, Ivor, and Lotte had never 
visited Earth. The rest, terrestrial natives, had been away long enough to have developed 
raging cases of homesickness. There were good-humored arguments about the most 
scenic places to visit, the best museums, theaters, and other cultural attractions, the finest 
restaurants, the greatest shopping. The only thing everyone seemed to agree on was that 


Earth's capital, Toronto, would provide a highly satisfactory introduction to all manner of 
earthly delights—provided that Ollie Schneider didn't win all of their money before they 
got there. 

The only person aboard Chispa not looking forward to arrival on Earth was me. 
Coping with the homicidal strategems of Alistair Drummond would be tough enough; 
keeping Simon from self-destructing might be even more of a challenge. But perhaps the 
worst dilemma I faced was how to deal with the family fink. 

I'd pretty well nailed down his identity by now, but I didn't dare expose him until the 
time was ripe—if it ever was. The Frost family's reputation was at stake, and Rampart's 
integrity as well. The most satisfactory resolution would have been to tell him that I 
knew, quietly obtain his resignation from the Starcorp, and then let him stew forever in 
his own vile juice. 

Before Katje's murder, that might have been a genuine option. It wasn't now. He'd 
have to pay a higher price for his unspeakable crime, but I was damned if I could decide 
what the price should be—or whether I had the right to exact it. 

When we were only a day out from Earth, a welcome communique from Commander 
Newton at Zone Patrol informed me that Dr. Ben Harrison Crystal and his Torngat 
Emergency Space-Medical Response team had been released unharmed on the freesoil 
planet Linsang. And wonder of wonders, the medics confirmed what we had already told 
the patrol—that they had been abducted by a hitherto unknown coalition of lawless 
humans and Haluk, who plied interstellar space in a starship of astonishing proportions. 

Newton refused my request for transcripts of the ab-ductees' statements, although he 
did grudgingly provide me with brief verbal summaries when I reminded him of 
Rampart's legal rights as co-victim in the crime. 

To my relief, Dr. Crystal's team apparently said nothing at all about Garth Lee's 
presence aboard their gig. Maybe they'd never noticed him among Karl's gang of 
hitchhikers on the way up from Torngat. Later on Lee might have made himself scarce. 
Neither did the medics report my conversation with Erik Skogstad, although they did 
comment on Joe Betan-court's abrupt termination. Maybe they'd been too preoccupied 
with the patient to eavesdrop. 

Jim Matsukawa, man of mystery, recovered fully from self-induced nicotine 
poisoning. His return to health had been the signal for the medical team's release. The 
junior medics speculated that Matsukawa must be a valued henchman of the pirates, who 
somehow engineered his rescue from captivity on Chispa by means of the cigar 
subterfuge. Dr. Crystal diagnosed Matsukawa as a cretinoid coprocephalic— helpfully 
translating the medical terminology into its Standard English equivalent of "stupid 
shithead"—who was lucky to be alive. 

Before letting the gig go, the raiders removed all of its high-tech healing equipment, 
expressing breezy apologies. The Response Team and their denuded craft were currently 
on their way back home, hitchhiking on a Macrodur transport diverted from the 
Redmond-Alpha run. 

Patrol Commander Newton told me that the authorities on Torngat were greatly 
relieved at the happy outcome to the abduction. (Pirates will be pirates, and these had 
proved more gentlemanly than most.) On the other hand, Rampart might expect to 
receive a bill for additional charges from Torngat Emergency Space-Medical Response to 
refit the stripped gig. 


Newton wanted to know why we'd had Matsukawa in our brig. I told the truth: he was 
a material witness in an upcoming civil case, legitimately in our custody. ZP could check 
with the Port Manager of Cravat for verification, if necessary. 

Newton said he would. And he'd be reporting the entire fishy incident to the 
Secretariat for Xenoaffairs. 

I said I really didn't give a damn. 

Eight standard days and fourteen hours after leaving the Perseus Spur, Chispa Dos 
entered the Terrestrial Solar System. 

I insisted on taking the helm when we touched down on Earth at the enormous 
Oshawa Platform Starport in Lake Ontario, fifty kilometers east of the Capital 
Conurbation. It was a perfect day in August, puffy white clouds in the sky, the cobalt-
blue lake sparkling with sunlight. Over on the shore, the gorgeous skyway-connected 
towers of Toronto shone beneath the faint shimmer of the force umbrella like colored 
spears entwined with gleaming ribbons. 

Earth. I decided I was glad to be back after all. 

Mimo was in the right-hand seat on the flight bridge. I settled Chispa into the docking 
cradle and shut down the SLD engines. Our internal graviton field cut off. We sat quietly, 
waiting to be towed away to the underwater hangar facility. 

"Earth gravity," I said. "Never thought I'd feel it again. Not nearly as strong as 
Dagasatt's. I'm almost ten kilos lighter. My sorry old muscles should have more oomph in 
them, too." 

Mimo laughed. "That's the conventional wisdom. However, your activities in the next 
few days will likely be more cerebral than physical, amigo." 

I stretched, flexed my pecs, made a fist of my right hand and slapped it solidly into 
my left palm. "That's right. Cerebral. A little necessary business to take care of in the 
capital, then maybe something completely different down in Arizona at the Rampart 
Board Meeting." 

"Would you like me to accompany you?" 

"Thanks, Mimo, but no. What happens next is between me and my family. A few 
days, and it'll all be resolved. You enjoy the capital for a while. I'll give you a call when 
the dust has settled and you can come down to the Sky Ranch. We'll relax together. I'll 
show you my old boyhood haunts." 

"Certainly. That will be very pleasant." 

"Don't worry. I've got my battle tactics all worked out. The good guys will triumph 
and the bastards will never know what hit 'em." 

"I have every confidence in you, mi hijo." 

We grinned at each other, neither believing a word the other was saying. 

 

 

Chapter 15 

 

"Asahel Frost has made a will!" Alistair Drummond thunders. "My legal people just 
found it in the public record and called it to my attention. Why didn't you inform me?" 

He decides to tell a prudent lie. "Because I didn't know about it myself until this 
morning." 

"So much for your bloody brilliant plan! ... And if that weren't bad enough, my 


investigators in Toronto have managed to ferret out another Rampart bombshell. I 
wonder if you can guess what it is." 

Drummond's face on the vidphone screen is a mask of ferocity, deeply tanned from 
his Arizona sojourn except for the area that was shielded by sunglasses. The ice-colored 
eyes set in startling ovals of pale flesh are no longer unreadable; they have the glaring 
wide pupils of a goaded predator poised to strike. 

"The venture credit prospectus!" the Galapharma CEO says. "Did ye think I wouldn't 
find out about it, ye treacherous buggerin' lump of shite?" A torrent of curses, some of 
them impenetrably Scottish, pours from the phone. 

But he remains withdrawn and silent, oddly immune to the beast's raging, mulling 
alternatives now that Asa's death can no longer ensure passage of the takeover vote. 
There must be another way to exert the necessary leverage. There must be. 

Drummond leans closer to the telephone's video pickup. His hair is disheveled. He 
wears the black cowboy shirt with its top pearl snaps open. A vein in his neck is 
throbbing. After his lapse into Caledonian, he has reverted to the purest Home Counties 
diction, full of withering contempt. "The prospectus. My agents inform me that Adam 
Stanislawski is about to accept. Do you know what that means? Of course you do! You 
helped draft the prospectus. You stood by as it was submitted, knowing it could mean the 
ruin of all my plans—of Galapharma itself. And so you're dead, you conniving scrote!... 
No, that's too easy! Why should I have you killed when your own family will see that 
you're sent to Coventry Blue?" 

Then he has it. Thanks to Drummond's ranting. 

His voice is a whipcrack. "Alistair, shut up." 

The enormity of his insubordination actually silences the beast. 

"You won't lose Rampart. I've thought of another way. And Macro's venture credit 
infusion will only increase the value of your new acquisition. Stanislawski won't 
withdraw out of spite after a Galapharma merger. He's a practical old Polack—and a 
political whiz. If he's decided to enter a venture scheme based on PD32:C2's prospects, 
he must have already sent up a few trial balloons in the Assembly concerning a new 
treaty with the Haluk. And liked what he heard. Alistair, we can still win this thing. I can 
do it for you." 

The Galapharma CEO has listened impatiently. Madness flickers in the black wells of 
his eyes, striving to take control; but in the end the rational portion of his mind 
supervenes. He blinks and pulls back from the phone lens. Stalling a little further, he 
screws a fresh giggle-stick into his jade cigarette holder, lights it, and takes a deep drag. 
Behind him is the understated elegance of his villa at the Arizona Biltmore. 

"Very well." As though he doesn't really care. "Tell me your new idea, lad." 

"Simon has scheduled the board meeting for this afternoon, at the Sky Ranch. I'll get 
his proxy before then. And Asa's, too." He explains how. 

Drummond is openly skeptical. "You haven't got it in you!" 

"Try me." 

"Hmph. All right. But if I decide that you've failed—or you attempt to pull some 
scam—I'll institute my own fallback action. It won't fail." 

"I'll call you when I have the proxies in hand. Would you like to attend the board 
meeting and make your ultimate pitch in person?" 

Caught by surprise, Drummond bursts into uproarious laughter. "Oh, yes! I accept 


your kind invitation." He is still laughing as the phone display goes dark. 

There was really only one costume appropriate for both Toronto and Arizona on that 
memorable day. So I was wearing my good old poplin briar pants, the Navajo-motif 
Pendleton shirt—getting a little frayed around the collar by now—and my beat-up Gokey 
snakeboots. I'd worn the duds a lot during my six-month stint as a Rampart VP, prowling 
Spur worlds in search of baddies. They were my armor against creeping corporate 
respectability. 

The day was a touch too warm for the waxed-cotton hunting coat, so to complete my 
outfit I borrowed one of Mimo's belts that had a massive silver buckle, along with a bolo 
necktie with a cabochon Mexican fire-opal on the slide. I carried a briefcase in which I'd 
stowed a notebook, a hard copy of Ollie Schneider's deposition, and a Kagi pistol in an 
innocuous-looking closed holster. 

When Matt Gregoire showed up in Chispa's boarding vestibule with Ollie Schneider 
in tow, she studied my ensemble with a knowing little smirk. "Killer threads! Seems to 
me I've seen them before." 

"When first we met," I concurred airily. "When you and Ollie and the Rampart Board 
of Directors first clapped eyes on the dreaded Helmut Icicle back on Seriphos—and froze 
your livers." 

We cackled in unison. Schneider stood there looking dejected—as well he might. 
After we finished with him, he was going to lodge in the CCID Detention Facility in 
Elora until the resolution of Rampart's civil case against Gala-pharma. It was a glamour 
slammer where the inmates were pampered, but it wasn't freedom. 

Matt looked marvelous in corporate mufti, an oyster silk pantsuit and a matching silk 
boatneck tee that set off her cinnamon skin to perfection. Her only jewelery was a pair of 
small Tyrinian gemshell ear-studs. She wore a stun-glove on her right hand, and her other 
wrist was linked to Ollie's by an unobtrusive security cable. 

The ship's computer said: Ground transport has arrived. 

The three of us went into the excursion bay and cycled the lock. Outside on the deck 
of the submarine hangar was a gleaming black robolimo. The front door opened and out 
stepped my cousin Zared Frost. He smiled at us without offering to shake hands, which 
was understandable under the circumstances. 

"We drew straws to decide who'd do escort duty. I won. Welcome to Earth." 

The President and Chief Operating Officer of Rampart Starcorp was a moderately tall 
man in his mid-forties. His carefully styled hair was glossy chestnut. An aquiline nose, 
high cheekbones, and a thin, decisive mouth made him the most good-looking member of 
the Frost clan. He was also one of the smartest. Only a limiting innate conservatism and a 
deficiency of that elusive entrepreneurial quality called "drive" had kept him from being 
designated crown prince of the family empire. 

His own father, my late Uncle Ethan, had sadly kissed Zed off as having "not a lick of 
fire in his belly." Ethan's will had divided his quarterstake between his wife, Emma 
Bradbury, and Simon to ensure that Zed would not gain control of the Starcorp. But my 
cousin had never given up his ambitions. 

Now he swept open the door to the rear limo compartment and ushered Matt and 
Schneider inside. "I'm sure you two won't mind if I have a few private words with my 
cousin Asa on the way into town." 

Matt said, "I understand." 


Ollie gave a bored shrug. 

When Zed and I were seated side by side in front, I said, "We'll have to make a short 
detour before going to Rampart Tower. To pick up Schneider's lawyer. He's in the 
Simcoe Block." 

Zed gave the destination to the car and we sped up and away to the Oshawa Collector. 
Moments later we were thirty meters high in the limpid summer air, westbound on the 
upper level of Queen Elizabeth Way, heading for the corporate spires of downtown 
Toronto. 

"I'll make this short and sweet, Asa," my cousin said. "What will it take for you to 
vote your quarterstake in favor of the Gala merger?" 

I pretended to consider. "How about your head on a platter with an apple in your 
mouth?" 

Zed turned and seized the strings of my bolo tie in both hands, hauling me toward 
him. "I'm serious, damn you!" 

Matt Gregoire was rapping anxiously on the closed glass partition separating us. I 
appreciated her concern, but I wasn't worried. 

Reaching around and entwining the fingers of my left hand in Zed's designer coiffure, 
I hoisted him ceilingward out of the leather bucket seat beside me. He shrieked—more 
from shock than from real pain. Hair is a merciful handle. Try yanking a large wad of 
your own some time. 

"In less than five seconds," I told him, "your nose will be smashed against the 
navigation console of the car. Or you can let go of my tie and we'll take it from the top." 

He turned me loose. I reciprocated. He flopped back into his seat, making soft 
gasping sounds. 

"Violence is not your metier, Zed," I remarked. "You're an amateur and I used to be a 
pro. Also, my muscles have pumped up a bit from living strenuously on high-grav 
planets, whereas you have mainly exercised your charisma." 

"Fuck you." 

"Why should I vote for the Galapharma takeover?" I asked him. 

"It'd be best for all of us." He turned away to stare out the windshield, smoothing his 
mussed hair continuously with a trembling hand. "You know what happens to people 
who get in Alistair Drummond's way." 

"Some of them get marooned on comets," I said lightly. "Some get semimorphed into 
Haluk. And some are given poison and die in their sleep." 

"Don't you think I know that?" he cried hotly. "His gorillas have threatened me, too—
and Jenny and the children! Even my mother! After Emma made her foolish little speech 
praising Eve at the last board meeting, I was told to modify her thinking—or expect to 
receive my inheritance from her before the next vote on the merger is taken. Drummond 
is insane, Asa! What kind of a man would order the deaths of two harmless old women?" 

"A desperate one." 

"Then let him have what he wants! We can't fight him. What difference does it make 
if Rampart becomes a division of Galapharma? For God's sake—we'll profit hugely from 
the deal, all of us!" 

I said, "You don't understand the Big Picture." 

"Andyou don't really give a damn about the Starcorp!" he bellowed. "Or Simon, or 
any of the rest of us except your precious big sister. I've worked my ass off for Rampart 


for twenty-three years! You thumbed your nose at it and went off to play cops and robbers 
until you fell on your face. Then you have the monumental brass to come waltzing back 
out of nowhere, pulling a snow-job on Simon, telling the rest of us you know what's 
best—" 

"Saving Eve, rousting Gala spies and saboteurs from Rampart's woodwork, corraling 
the one material witness who can nail Drummond's hide to the barn door." I chuckled 
without humor. "Some brass. You could use a little yourself, Zed— stuck up your spine." 

"You—you—you cowboy}" 

I guess it was the worst epithet in his vocabulary. I had the feeling he would have laid 
hands on me again, if he'd dared. His eyes were darting wildly. One hand clenched into a 
fist and the fingers of the other scratched reflexively at the fabric of his pants leg. Cousin 
Zed was a man approaching the end of his rope. 

I didn't say anything. After a while the anger and tension leaked out of him like grain 
from a punctured feed bag. He slumped in the leather seat and I saw tears trickling from 
his eyes. 

"Asa," he finally said in a hoarse voice. "I'm scared out of my fuckin' mind. So are 
Dan and Beth. They've told me so. Drummond's brutes must have threatened Simon and 
Eve, too. Please! Be reasonable. You can solve everything—" 

"I'm doing my best to do that," I said. "In my own way." 

"You'll be the death of us all." He said it almost matter-of-factly. "Unless I can 
convince you to vote in favor of the merger." 

"You can't." 

He eyed me askance, his face full of desperation. "You wouldn't even have to go to 
the board meeting and face down Eve and your father. If you gave me your proxy I 
could—" 

"Zed. No." 

He gave a great sigh. "Then it's on your head. Whatever happens." 

"If it makes you feel any better to believe that, be my guest. But there's a quote by a 
Brit named Edmund Burke that I used to have mounted on my office wall at ICS. Joanna 
embroidered it for me—can you believe it? It said: 'All that is required for evil to triumph 
is for good men to do nothing.' I got to feeling pretty pessimistic about that philosophy 
after I got Thrown Away. Now I'm maybe ready to give it another shot." 

"You're a self-righteous bastard." His voice was faint, resigned. "You don't care who 
gets hurt." 

I nodded. "Simon would probably agree with you." 

"Go to hell," he said dully. "Go to hell." 

After a while the limo's computer said: Now arriving at Simcoe Block. Please 
indicate the office you intend to visit so that the proper skyway may be selected. Default 
is the underground parking lot. 

I said, "Law offices of Falwyn, Singh, and Bloomberg." 

We zoomed up the spiral skyway with inertialess ease and exited at Level 62. A 
uniformed flunky came to greet us. 

"I'll wait with the car," Zared Frost said in a dead voice. 

So Matt and Ollie and I left him. 

Our business didn't take long. Jaswinder Singh, a bearded man wearing a 
butterscotch-colored suit and a matching turban, had a mournful expression and dark 


liquid eyes that took in my casual garb with cosmopolitan insouciance. After the 
introductions, he embraced his old college chum— hampered only slightly by Schneider's 
being shackled to Matt—and commiserated briefly. 

One of the incriminating sealed packets sat on Singh's desk. (Ollie had told him to 
destroy the other one.) The lawyer had Schneider open the container and verify its 
contents. Then Singh said to me, "As I understand it, you now wish me to accompany 
you to Rampart Tower, where the formal offer of immunity will be vouchsafed by 
Rampart's CEO." 

"That's correct," I said. 

"Very well. I'm ready to proceed." He rummaged beneath his desk and produced a 
case to carry the packet in. 

"There's one other small thing you might do, if you're willing," I said diffidently. "It 
would save us considerable time and enhance our goodwill toward the prisoner. Rampart 
would expect to be billed for your services, of course." 

"What's that?" 

I opened my own briefcase and took out the notebook primed with the dime of 
Schneider's deposition. I handed the hard copy transcript to Singh for his examination, 
explaining what it was and how it still required interrogator-validation by an independent 
officer of the court before becoming admissible evidence. 

"Matt Gregoire and I are the interrogators of record and both of us hold praefectus 
status," I concluded, powering up the notebook. "I'd like you to do the validation. I know 
my request is somewhat unorthodox, but I have good reasons for not using a Rampart 
legal officer in the procedure. You may duplicate and retain the data for your records if 
your firm intends to act on Schneider's behalf during the upcoming proceedings." 

Singh frowned at the scene on the notebook's flatscreen as the preliminary statements 
played and the recorded questioning began. He flipped briefly through the bound sheets 
of 

the hard copy, then tapped the notebook's Pause pad and spoke to Schneider. 

"Ollie, do you want me to validate this deposition? It would be better if I examined it 
closely first—" 

"Nah. Do it, Windy. I really want Rampart's goodwill enhanced. And if you'll 
represent me, I guarantee I can pay my bills ... if you don't object to sheltered funds." 

Some subdued laughter. I tried without success to imagine this dignified, middle-aged 
Sikh lawyer as a hell-raising undergraduate named Windy. 

Jaswinder Singh lifted his hands in a gesture of agreement and called in an assistant 
with the proper data-amending equipment. Ten minutes later it was done. Schneider's 
validated deposition was transmitted safely to Rampart's legal department computers and 
incorporated into the body of the civil suit, just as Eve and I had arranged it during my 
flight to Earth. 

And there wasn't a thing the family fink could do about it. 

Rampart Tower in Toronto pales in comparison to the grandiose structure on the 
planet Seriphos that serves as the working corporate headquarters. The tower is a nice 
enough building, a hundred stories high, with three skyways providing direct access from 
the high-road network in addition to a hopper pad and the usual basement connection to 
Underground Toronto. But in those days, Rampart itself only occupied the top fifteen 
floors in the tower; the offices below were leased out. It was a fairly typical setup for a 


Starcorp of moderate size that had great expectations. 

Our small group was subdued as we disembarked at the uppermost exit of Rampart 
Tower's skyway. Simon's assistant, Guido Cabrini, met us in the glass-enclosed porte-
cochere, accompanied by two uniformed InSec guards. 

"These gentlemen will relieve you of your prisoner," he said to Matt. And to Singh: 
"You and your client will be taken to one of our lounges until your presence is required. 
There will be something to eat." 

Cousin Zed had slipped away almost as soon as the limo stopped moving. Matt and I 
followed Cabrini's suggestion that we freshen up in the opulent executive washrooms 
before going into the meeting. When I returned to the foyer, Matt was already there, 
admiring the spectacular view while Cabrini pointed out landmarks. 

"—and just to the south of us, at the edge of the Inner Harbor, is Galapharma Tower. 
Four hundred stories high. The Concern's offices fill every square meter of space." 

Mart's lips were twitching suspiciously. "What a striking architectural style the Gala 
building has. So... erect!" 

Guido Cabrini grinned. "It does have a rather emphatic masculine aspect, doesn't it? 
Capital wags have many colorful names for it. The Galapharma headquarters in Glasgow 
is three times larger, but not nearly so evocatively designed ... Would you please come 
with me to the conference room? The attendees are just finishing a buffet lunch." 

We followed him down a sunny corridor decorated with potted plants and generic 
artwork. Since this uppermost floor was dedicated to the most rarefied commercial 
machinations, it gave the appearance of being nearly deserted. The occasional ranking 
minion wafted by, doing a double take at my nonconformist appearance. 

The conference room was a huge circular chamber enclosed in floor-to-ceiling 
window. The 360-degree view of the Capital Conurbation and the glorious blue lake was 
breathtaking. In its center was a fanciful stone construction that would have served as a 
multiple fireplace in winter; in August it was an artificial waterfall adorned with native 
and exotic flowering plants. Around the room's perimeter were furniture groupings—
couches, low tables, and serving cre-denzas, as well as com units, computers, and other 
equipment, well-camouflaged so as not to disfigure the ambience of managerial elegance. 
A much larger circular table with more than a dozen chairs and individual recessed data 
terminals stood on the room's north side—perhaps coincidentally out of eyeshot of 
Galapharma Tower. 

When Matt and I were led in and announced by Guido Cabrini, there were three 
distinct groups of people waiting, conversing in subdued voices and munching from 
plates of tidbits. The Rampart contingent included Simon, Eve—in another Merry Widow 
disguise, veil and all—Dan, Zed, and old Gunter Eckert, Rampart's Chief Financial 
Officer. 

Not quite mingling with them were the governmental representatives—three people 
from the Interstellar Commerce Secretariat and four from the Office of the Chief 
Prosecutor of the Commonwealth Judicial Tribunal. I recognized only two of them: 
Undersecretary Vernon Kildare of ICS, one of the few among my former superiors in the 
Enforcement Division who had not believed me guilty of the trumped-up charges; and 
Special Prosecutor Hildegarde Lambert, indefatigable nemesis of corporate villains, 
known in the halls of justice as Broom-Hilda in celebration of her sweeping Wiccan 
style. 


Matt and I acquired cups of coffee and plates of fancy edibles. Cabrini went around 
reciting the names and titles of the bureaucrats for our benefit and we nodded and smiled 
a lot. Then the executive assistant withdrew from the room and Simon took charge. 

My father had eschewed his customary ranchman's outfit for an archaic linen ice-
cream suit complete with a vest, a black string tie, and a striped shirt with French cuffs. 
He looked almost like Mark Twain without a mustache. His green eyes were aglitter and 
he broadcast vibes of barely repressed glee. 

"Ladies and gentlemen, let's all sit down any whichaway at the big round table. Bring 
your vittles and drinks along. We all know why we're here, so let's cut to the chase and do 
what's necessary. Hilda—maybe you'll sit beside me. Asa— you, too, on the other side." 

Well, well. I gave Matt an ironic look and went to do my parent's bidding. Eve 
waggled fingers in greeting and Gunter smiled. My brother Dan, looking strained and 
even more colorless than usual, gave me a curt nod. Zed seemed to be in a state of shock, 
staring blindly out the windows, refusing to meet anyone's eye or respond to attempts at 
conversation. 

Many of the government lawyers stared at me with frank curiosity. Cosmopolitan 
Toronto did not harbor too many birds of my exotic species. I presumed everyone present 
knew of my checkered background. 

Hildegarde Lambert said, "You've been a long time rehabilitating, Asa, but I'm happy 
to see you back. Especially under such novel circumstances." 

I said, "Thank you, ma'am" in my best bashful cowpoke style. 

Undersecretary Kildare murmured, "Is this blockbuster your doing?" 

"I didn't start the fight, Vern. But I may help to finish it." 

Simon scowled me into silence. He didn't bother to rise, but plunged right into his 
presentation. 

"The terminals in front of each one of you will furnish a running summary of my 
introduction. You may also consult them ad lib for background, specifics of evidence, or 
whatever other sort of data strikes your fancy." He swept the gathering with a slit-eyed 
look of raw triumph. I noticed that he'd dropped his folksy western drawl and reverted to 
Standard English. "Everybody ready? This meeting is to announce that Rampart 
Interstellar Corporation is filing suit against Galapharma Amalgamated Concern. It's our 
contention that Galapharma conspired to damage and devalue Rampart for the purpose of 
forcing its stakeholders to accept an unsolicited and hostile acquisition bid. Among other 
torts, we allege industrial espionage, sabotage of equipment, theft and subsequent 
malicious use of data, extortion, subornation of Rampart employees, and incitement of 
Rampart-World Indigenous Sapients to riot with the express purpose of causing injury to 
Starcorp installations. You can read all the subsidiary stuff later. In our suit, pursuant to 
Statute 129 of the Interstellar Commerce Code, we are demanding as redress the 
maximum damages set by law—that is, all assets tangible and intangible of Galapharma 
Amalgamated Concern, as shall be ascertained by a Receiver appointed by the 
Commonwealth Judiciary Tribunal." 

A pause. A deep breath. The blazing Frost grin, accompanied by a heartfelt "Whew!" 
Then he leaned his elbows on the table and folded his hands under his chin. "That's the 
bare bones of it. The boring legalities are in the computer. What I'm going to do now is 
tell you the meat of the story." 

His tale of corporate iniquity took less than half an hour and held them spellbound 


every minute. He was funny, profane, and full of fiery indignation, a hard-charging 
smalltime operator on the verge of crossing over into the Big Time being cut off at the 
knees by an unscrupulous and soulless business rival. 

He touched only briefly on important criminal aspects of the conspiracy—my 
frameup and the attempts on my life, the murder of Yaoshuang Qiu and the others, Eve's 
kidnapping, Gala's treaty violations—saying that he'd leave those matters in the able 
hands of the Judiciary. 

Now and then he'd ask a question of me or Matt Gregoire or Eve, to which we gave 
brief answers. He told his audience about Gala's prime motivation for the scheme—its 
desire to control the Perseus Spur and open up a vast new market for human products 
among the Haluk. He and Eve explained the use of PD32:C2 in eradicating Haluk 
allomorphism. 

Nothing was said about the demiclone scheme, nor was there any suggestion that the 
Haluk might pose a threat to the human hegemony in the Milky Way. 

Simon gave a highly edited account of the retrieval of Oliver Schneider by "motivated 
bounty hunters," provoking cynical chuckles and at least one catcall of "Atta boy, Asa!" 
from an anonymous suit. 

Then my father wound up his presentation. "The crucial deposition of Schneider, 
together with certain other important evidentiary material supplied by him, forms the core 
of our suit against Galapharma. My son Asahel and his associates, together with Rampart 
Vice President Matilde Gregoire, risked their lives to bring this material witness to Earth. 
He's here today, along with his attorney, to petition for immunity in exchange for his 
testimony. Rampart is willing to grant his request, since he has fully cooperated with his 
interrogators, and Special Prosecutor Hildegarde Lambert has also graciously concurred." 

The door opened and Ollie came in, unshackled, flanked by Jaswinder Singh and 
trailed by the two security guards. There was a small commotion, during which holocams 
and other recording equipment were set up by the junior suits, following Dan's 
instructions. As Rampart's Chief Legal Officer, my older brother supervised the small 
ceremony that followed, in which Eve and Broom-Hilda declared that Ollie would get off 
scot-free if he repeated his testimony freely in open court, skewering Gala sixty ways 
from Sunday. 

And that was that. It was 1400 hours. The lawyers from the Prosecutor's Office took 
away their data to prepare the indictment. The ICS officials withdrew to weigh the 
criminal aspects of the case; later they would make recommendations to the Tribunal. In 
the Commonwealth of Human Worlds, civil law violations applicable to corporations 
took precedence over mere criminal proceedings. 

Oliver Schneider and Jaswinder Singh returned to the executive lounge to await the 
arrival of CCID marshals, who would take the precious prisoner off to a country-club 
pokey, guarding him en route like a ton of transactinide treasure. 

When all of the non-Rampart people were gone, Simon stamped the floor with his 
boot, punched the air with his fist, and hollered, "Yee-Aaw!" 

Gunter, Eve, Matt, and I roared with relieved laughter. 

"We're gonna eat 'em up!" Simon exulted. "Peel that slimeball Drummond like a 
catfish and fry him up for supper! Asa—did Zed tell you about Macrodur?" 

I shot a glance at my cousin, who was standing somberly with both hands thrust into 
his pants pockets, his face blank as a hardboiled egg. "No, he didn't." 


"They've accepted our prospectus," my brother Dan said in a completely neutral tone. 
"Eve had your friend Beatrice Mangan provide Macrodur with a copy of the Tokyo 
research confirming eradication of the allomorphic trait in the body through substitution 
of human DNA. It was enough to convince Adam Stanislawski." 

"Ain't that a sockdolager?" yipped Simon. 

I turned to my sister. "Congratulations, Evie." I lifted the veil of her cartwheel hat and 
kissed her blue alien cheek. 

"We still have to vote down the takeover and send Drum-mond packing," she said. 
"The other members of the board are waiting at the Sky Ranch." 

"We'll do it, and then we'll have the biggest party on God's green earth!" Simon 
declared. He seized Matt Gregoire by her upper arms and whirled her around. In their 
white suits they made an oddly consonant pair. "How's about it, gal? You're coming 
down to Arizona with us—right? And where's the rest of Asa's gang? Karl and the 
Mexican smuggler and the rest of'em?" 

"Settling in at the King Edward Hotel." Matt extricated herself gently. "And so will 
I—at least for the next few days." She smiled at me, then continued more gravely. 
"There'll be plenty of time for parrying after the Rampart board takes care of necessary 
business. And after the Frost family unwinds. Perhaps Citizen Cabrini can call me a taxi." 

Dan said, "Certainly. I'll speak to him." He used his pocket phone. "It'll be at the 
porte-cochere in a few minutes." 

Matt squeezed my hand. "I hope you'll throw a barbecue when I visit the ranch. I've 
always been curious about them. And I'd like to see cactuses and tumbling tumbleweeds." 

"Cactus, yes. Tumbleweeds are pests that were eradicated from the ranch before I was 
born. But maybe we can find some on the Navajo Reservation. They have neat rock 
formations up there, too." 

"I'll look forward to it." She went out. 

I turned to the others. "I presume we have an armed hopper to take us to the ranch. 
It'd be a sorry thing if we were ambushed by Drummond's hoodlums this late in the 
game." 

"It's waiting on the roof pad," Dan said. 

"There are a few things I must pick up in my office before we leave," Eve said, 
dashing for the door. "I won't be five minutes." 

When she had gone, Cousin Zed ambled off toward the conference room John. "I'm 
going to take a leak." 

Gunter Eckert hesitated a moment, then smiled sheepishly. "Oh, hell. Guess I'll 
follow Zed's example. That was a pretty exciting meeting." 

Simon said, "I'm gonna have me a shot of rye to celebrate." He opened the nearest 
liquor cabinet. "How about you boys?" 

Dan hesitated, looking around the suddenly emptied room. Then he smiled and 
reached inside his jacket. "Nothing for me, thanks .. . and nothing for you two, either." 

He pulled out an Ivanov stun-pistol and aimed it at my face. 

Simon dropped the rye decanter. It smashed, and the smell of fine Canadian whiskey 
stung our nostrils. "Holy fucking shit! Dan, have you lost your mind?" 

"Not him," I said. "Not Daniel Scott Frost, Esquire. His mind's tracking on 
ultraluminal drive." 

"To the pad elevator!" he commanded. "Fast—before the others get back." 


"What is this?" Simon whispered in disbelief. 

"He's a Galapharma stooge," I said. "Probably from the beginning." 

"You knew?" Dan seemed genuinely surprised. "How?" 

"Your little visit to Cravat was the only thing that gave you away. When I first arrived 
there, hunting for Eve, Bob Bas-combe the Port Traffic Manager momentarily mistook 
me for you. Called me by your name and said, 'Welcome back.' Later, I checked with his 
widow and she told me you'd made a hush-hush visit and gone off by yourself—
supposedly on a hunting trip. Your Cravat excursion wasn't in any of Rampart's executive 
flight logs, hence it wasn't just an innocent jaunt. You went to check out the Haluk 
installation, right?" 

"Of course," he said coolly. 

"Was it your idea to demiclone Eve?" 

"The clone would have been my puppet if she became CEO. I knew Simon and the 
board would never consider me for the top slot. Not good, gray Dan—even though I was 
the best possible choice." 

"Haw!" Simon barked in derision. "In your dreams! Even Zed's got more moxie than 
you, Danny-boy!" 

My brother smiled. "My dream is about to come true— thanks to Alistair Drummond. 
He's agreed to put me in charge of the Rampart Division of Galapharma." 

Simon said, "Sweet suffering Christ! Then he's a bigger wackadoo than I thought." 

"That's enough!" Dan said viciously. "Get into the elevator, you old fool—or I'll give 
you a three-dart shot right now." 

A lethal stun-chemical dose for humans. 

"Come on, Pop," I said. 

Simon was still spluttering. I took his arm and led him across the big room. Dan 
followed, not too closely, keeping the pistol close to his own body. Smart. He opened the 
elevator doors, herded us inside the spacious car, took a position in the right front corner 
and touched the control panel. We ascended. 

"I didn't think you'd make your move until we got to the ranch," I remarked. "Figured 
there'd be too many witnesses here. Stupid me. Wile E. Coyote wins a round." 

The doors opened into a bubble-shelter on the very summit of Rampart Tower. A ten-
seater Garrison-Laguna hopper-craft, armored and discreetly armed, waited on the pad 
outside: secure transport for nervous upper management. 

"You drive, Roadrunner." Dan slipped right into our childhood nicknames without 
missing a beat. "Pop sits beside you and I'm behind, ready to give him a triple if you 
screw up." 

"Gotcha," I said. We boarded the luxurious machine. I said, "Where to? Gala-
schlonga Tower over yonder? Or do you plan to kick us out of the aircraft over Lake 
Ontario?" 

"Nothing so crude. Your deaths wouldn't bring about the appropriate outcome. My 
intention is to keep you alive in a safe place until Gala and Rampart are well and truly 
married and the civil litigation has been quashed. Your conditions of confinement will be 
either comfortable or odious. The choice is yours. If you give me your proxies so that I 
can vote your stakes at the board meeting—" 

"Stick your head up your ass," Simon told his oldest son, "and eat a turd sandwich." 

Dan was undismayed. "You may change your mind when I show you the alternative." 


To me: "Get us out of here now. Request a low-altitude nonexpress vector to 
Mississauga." 

I complied. We lifted off the pad and soared into the northwest at a sedate velocity 
under the guidance of Toronto Air Traffic Control. 

"Where are we going?" I asked. "Some hideaway up in the North Woods?" 

"Not nearly so far," Dan said. "Tell the navigator to take us to the Blue 
Disenfranchised Persons Reserve." 

 

 

Chapter 16 

 

We landed in a gated hopper park and made our way on foot through a narrow, filthy 
lane to the turpirudinous enterprises lining Peel Road. On that bright summer afternoon 
the sidewalks of the Blue Strip were nearly deserted, as Dan had doubtless anticipated. 
Most of the few cars cruising the streets had registration tags from distant places: tourists 
from the boondocks window-shopping the X-rated attractions. 

"Why the hell have you brought us to this friggin' sin-bin?" Simon demanded 
wrathfully. 

"For some attitude adjustment," Dan said. "Then I'm going to ask you again for your 
proxies." 

"Ask till you turn blue, you two-faced snake in the grass! You underhanded young 
weasel! Shoot me dead in the goddamn street. Go ahead! Kill me like you killed your 
poor mother, you cunt-lappin' polecat. See what it gets you." 

"Keep walking," my brother said. 

Simon and I proceeded together, attracting no attention in spite of his tirade. Dan 
followed a good two meters behind with the Ivanov tucked in the pocket of his charcoal 
silk sport jacket. He had warned us that the weapon was still set to the three-dart lethal 
mode. Disposal of our bodies would pose no problem in Coventry. 

At the end of the block was a large building with a facade that gleamed as fluidly 
black as the tar pits of the Dagasatt Bitumen Desert. Its sign said SILVER SCYBALUM. A 
few well-dressed idlers stood on the sidewalk in front of the establishment, staring into 
the front window and laughing. 

"This is the place," Dan said. "Before we go in, I'd like to call your attention to the 
exhibit in the display window." 

"Alien critter," my father growled, not bothering to hide his disgust, "Criminal 
exploitation, I'd call it." 

Dan said, "You're wrong, Pop .. . Asa, tell him what that thing is. Or was." 

"It's not a genuine alien, Simon. It's a human genen transform. A prison inmate who's 
been morphed with dystasis therapy. God only knows why the poor devil ended up like 
this. Perhaps he got on the wrong side of a convict kingpin and this was his punishment. 
This dive features performances by counterfeit aliens. You can probably purchase their 
sexual services as well." 

Simon's eyes were goggling. "But—how can the authorities allow—" 

"The prisoners inside Coventry Blue are lifer Throw-aways," I explained. "Every one 
has been convicted of some major corporate felony. They have no rights. And this 
particular DPR has been under the control of the inmates for over thirty years, with the 


tacit permission of the authorities." 

"That's disgusting!" 

Dan laughed. "Nonsense. It makes for a more effective deterrent. And a source of 
innocent merriment for the capital citizenry. Anything goes inside Coventry Blue! 
Whatever depraved amusement your imagination can conceive is available, at a price. 
You'd be shocked to know how many corporate and government notables are regular 
visitors." 

Two gigantic doormen, dressed as antique comic-book astronauts, flung wide the 
double doors when Dan spoke to them in a low voice. We were obviously expected. The 
three of us entered a lobby tricked out like a set from a 1930s movie serial. A bevy of 
muscular transvestites in provocative "sci-fi" costumes converged on us. Their melon-
sized breasts were bare, with nipples saucily painted to match their different colored 
outfits. They wore bejeweled open helmets crowned with droll little faux antennas. 

"Welcome! Bienvenida! Konichi wa.'Allo!" 

Simon muttered, "Great blazing balls o' fire." 

"We are your hostesses—the Bitch Gals from Outer Space! The Silver Scybalum will 
be your passport to erotic delights beyond human comprehension! The fee is only two 
kay. For each of you, of course." 

Dan stopped them in their mincing tracks. "Can it, girls. We have an appointment 
with King Farley. My name is Daniel Frost." 

"Wait just a nanosec," said the tallest bitch, a vision in pansy-purple with a baritone 
voice. She went behind a counter and used a phone. The other hostesses pouted at us. 

"Go right in," the baritone said. "Follow the arrows. The king will come to meet you." 

An unobtrusive door slid open briefly to admit us, then closed with a solid clunk, 
secured by an old-fashioned solenoid lock. Dan herded us down a ramp to a wide, curved 
corridor that seemed to encircle some central architectural feature. It was dimly lit and 
dirty. The inner wall was full of closed doors with numbers on them, and murky 
secondary hallways. Green arrows blinked on the outer wall, showing us which way to 
go. This area of the funhouse had none of the trashy splendor of the foyer upstairs. Its 
ramshackle plastic and wooden structural members, wiring, and plumbing were largely 
exposed. I had the impression that we were behind the scenes of a firetrap theater. 

The tumid rhythms of Ravel's "Bolero" came faintly through flimsy walls of particle 
board. I heard a distant spatter of applause. 

Then the creature appeared, slithering—there's no other way to describe his means of 
locomotion—out of one of the dark side passages like some mythological caricature. 
Simon and I stopped in our tracks, gaping. 

He was only about 130 centimeters tall, with the dried-apple face of a little old man—
nose and chin almost touching, squinty black eyes buried in puddles of wrinkles, a mouth 
full of tiny, artificial-looking teeth. His body, in contrast, was elaborately muscled. He 
might have been an over-inflated action-figure doll wearing the wrong head. He was 
dressed in a skintight garment and crested hood of some remarkable reflective material 
that gave him the appearance of having been dipped in iridescent molten metal. The suit 
featured an undulating whiplike tail and a glistening ithyphallic codpiece with obscene 
motility. At least I hoped the damned thing was fake... 

The creature said, "I am King Farley. I own the Silver Scybalum." He oozed closer to 
Simon and me, eyeing us with horrid appraisal. My father shrank back in loathing. "Are 


these the two subjects?" 

I tensed instinctively, ready to jump the little abomination and use him as a hostage. 
King Farley pointed an index finger at me and a blue spark did aTinkerbell hop from its 
electrode tip to my breastbone. 

An invisible branding iron seemed to sear my flesh. I let out a scream, staggered, and 
would have fallen if Simon hadn't caught me in his wiry arms. He uttered a volley of 
profanity and asked if I was badly hurt. 

I told him I was okay and regained my balance within a few moments. The tiny 
bastard in the silver lizard suit was a walking laser. It was the same electroshock 
technology Captain Ziggy Cybulka had used to knock me ass over teakettle back at 
Mimo's place. 

Dan was saying, "This is the pair I spoke to you about, King. Before we conclude our 
negotiations for their—urn— sojourn, I wonder if you might show them some of the 
transform possibilities?" 

"Why, sure!" shrilled the manikin. "Today's pretty slow. Most of the pets are just 
hanging out in the bullpen. Just take a peek through here." He threw open a ramshackle 
pair of shutters that covered a grubby window on the inner wall. "Every single one an 
authentic reproduction! Every single one available..." 

Dan motioned with the Ivanov. "Look carefully. Imagine the possibilities! Then 
decide whether you want to give me your voting proxies or not." 

We looked. 

Hieronymus Bosch would have loved it. 

 

During my tour of field duty in the ICS, I'd seen a considerable number of grotesque 
xeno life-forms. Simon, a veteran galactic traveler, had also encountered his fair share. 
But King Farley's crowded "bullpen" was a revelation to both of us, simultaneously 
fascinating, stomach-turning, and pathetic. The dismal holding area imprisoned at least 
fifty beings—all different, most having not the slightest resemblance to anything 
human—resting apathetically or moving about in frenetic agitation. 

"Takes only about three months in dystasis to do the makeover job," Farley said 
chattily. "I got talented staff." 

As my father and I watched, a hatch slid open at one side of the pen and a hulking 
Bitch Gal armed with a high-tech cattleprod moved into the nightmarish throng. She 
beckoned to one of the creatures, a thing with long silken hair and garishly colored ischial 
callosities that resembled a cross between a dwarf mastodon and a mandrill baboon. It 
meekly followed the hostess out to whatever duties awaited it. 

King Farley closed the shutters. "That's enough, I think." He folded his shimmering 
pneumatic arms and said, "Well?" 

Simon was aghast, his gaze darting from his impassive older son to the smirking 
pimp. "Dan, you can't be serious—" 

My brother reached into his inside jacket pocket and brought out an electronic 
document slate with an iris-reader. "Here's the proxy form. Both of you imprint it. Then 
you can spend the next two years wearing your own bodies, living in one of the king's 
town houses." 

"Not a top squat," Farley remarked with a shrug, "but comfortable enough. Decent 
food, warm in winter. Better than most of our Coventry Blue inmates enjoy. Otherwise, 


into the tank—presto, change-o! Makes no nevermind to me. I get paid the same, either 
option." 

Silently, I held out my hand. Dan gave me the slate and I lifted it to my eye. My 
brother smiled broadly and handed the document to Simon. 

The old man was staring at Dan in sad astonishment. "For Ramparfl You want to be 
boss-man that badly? Everything you've done ... your mother's death, what you were 
ready to do to Eve ... and now this. Just so you could run Rampart! Daniel, I just don't 
understand." 

"You never did," my good, gray brother said, thrusting out the proxy slate. He wasn't 
smiling anymore. 

Simon eyeballed it. 

Suddenly, two of the muscular transvestites from the lobby were standing in the 
corridor. One wore a bubblegum-pink costume and the other was clad in turquoise satin. 
Both of them held prods. 

"Our business is concluded, Citizen Frost," the kingpin convict said to Dan. "I'll 
expect the agreed-upon emolument at your earliest convenience. You can go out the way 
you came in. Chantal and Pepper will escort the other two gents to their accommodation 
in Dannemora House." 

King Farley slithered away with amazing rapidity, waving his tail, and Dan turned to 
go. 

"It's not over," I told my brother. 

"Alistair Drummond will be at the board meeting in Arizona to present his latest 
tender in person." He glanced at his watch. "Just a little over two hours from now. I '11 
give your regrets to him and the others. They'll understand why you didn't care to be 
present. Goodbye, Asa, Simon. We'll talk again in a couple of years and discuss your 
future." 

Then he was gone. 

My father and I exchanged glances. His rangy trail-boss features had gone flaccid. He 
looked dazed and old. 

"I'm Pepper!" chirped the pink Bitch Gal. She topped my height by nine or ten 
centimeters. 

"I'm Chantal!" said the turquoise slut. She was a bit shorter, but still had maybe 
fifteen kilos on me. "Let's move right along to your new home, dahlings." 

"You guys take bribes?" I asked hopefully. 

They burst into merry chortles. "Isn't it precious\" said Pepper. Then she zapped me 
in the groin with the cattleprod. 

I collapsed on the filthy floor, moaning. 

"Now, now," Pepper crooned. "That was only the minimum setting, sweetie. Hardly 
enough to toast your tiny chestnuts. Upsy daisy!" 

I rolled over, fumbled onto my hands and knees, head down, still making doleful 
sounds. Pink Pepper was telling nothing but the truth; the shocker had delivered small 
voltage, and it had missed my family jewels and hit my inner thigh—a distinct owie, but 
hardly enough to disable a fit male human. 

"Up up up!" urged Pepper cheerily. 

"Oh, Jesus," I wailed. "Gimme a minute. Oh, God, that hurts." 

"Poor baby." Chantal laughed. "You should wear them ring-tucked, as we do, and 


they wouldn't be so vulnerable." 

Shaking my addled head, I caught a glimpse of the turquoise bitch standing next to 
Simon, baton hanging carelessly at her side. 

I got up, Mr. Wobbly, face all squinched with pain. Pepper had her stick raised, 
buzzing gently, ready to deal me another zotz if I misbehaved. Praying the thing had a 
deadman switch that would deactivate it when dropped, I stepped close, used both my 
forearms to clobber her weapon arm, and got a two-handed grip on her wrist. Then I 
pivoted sharply, bringing her arm over my shoulder and shattering her elbow. The prod 
fell out of her hand. I kicked the back of her knee and Pepper went down howling. Then I 
stomped the bridge of her nose with the heel of my heavy snakeboot. 

No more noise. Maybe no more Pepper, if I'd managed to drive her broken nasal bone 
into her brain. 

Snapping out of a state of momentary bamboozlement, Chantal came at me like a 
fury, swinging her hissing baton like an electrified baseball bat. One touch and I was 
fried. I dodged and flung myself at her, encircling her upraised arm and neck while 
locking my hands and squeezing with all my strength. Her silly helmet went flying. She 
fell over backward with me on top of her, forcing the pinioned arm and head forward. 

A noise like a wet stick cracking. 

Chantal went limp. 

"Holy fuck," whispered Simon. 

"Yeah." I climbed to my feet and went about retrieving the cattleprods. "That one's 
neck is broken. You want to check out the other?" 

Simon complied. "I don't think she—he—whatever—is breathing." 

"We're outta here, Pop." I gave him one of the weapons. "Move! And for God's sake, 
watch where you wave that prod." 

Bless King Farley's villainous heart, he'd forgotten to turn off the green directional 
arrows. We found the ramp without getting lost, dashed up it— 

—and came smack against the locked lobby door. 

I rapped on it with my weapon: shave-and-a-haircut. 

"Who's there?" a voice fluted. 

"It's Pepper and Chantal, dahlings!" I called in falsetto. "And you'll never guess what 
kind of goodies we've got!" 

Buzz. The old-time lock let go and the door opened. A Bitch Gal in golden lame 
managed one terrified squeak before I jolted her full-power between her hormonally 
enhanced boobs. The tall dollie in purple tried to flee into the street, but I grabbed her by 
her gem-studded belt and delivered an electrical goose. 

"Okay," I said to Simon. "I'm going to yank open these front doors. You burn the left-
hand doorman and I'll do the other one." 

His green eyes were glittering with vitality again. "Got it. But dammit-all, Asa, 
how're we gonna get shut of this fuckin' calaboose? They got walls with razor wire, Kagi 
guns—" 

"And tourists. Just do as I do. On three. One... two..." 

We burst through the doors, delivered the volts, and watched the spacesuited gorillas 
topple like a pair of silver-clad refrigerators. The thrillseekers gathered at the display 
window watched with their jaws hanging open. A couple of cars slowed and the 
occupants lowered their windows to see what was happening. 


I waved my baton in salute. "Just part of the show, folks. There's always loads of funl 
At the Silver Scybalum!" 

I grabbed Simon's arm and dragged him toward a smelly gangway that led around to 
the back of the building. "Now run like your pants are afire." 

We took off at a gallop. The area behind the Blue Strip was a far cry from the tarted-
up main thoroughfare. Aside from the parking lots and guarded lots for visiting hoppers, 
the buildings were shabby and bleak, dormitories or structures originally dedicated to 
various inmate services in the failed experiment of a "village" governed by the prisoners 
themselves. Of course there wasn't a guard to be seen. They almost never left the area 
around the main gate unless a visitor called for help on a pocket phone. Sometimes not 
even then . . . 

Nobody followed us—but that didn't mean we were home free. I had no doubt that 
King Farley and his freakish court had already discovered our escape, but they had to find 
a way of nabbing us without frightening the paying customers. I figured we had a few 
more minutes before the balloon went up. 

The first hopper lot we passed was nearly empty, except for a raggedy attendant 
snoozing on a stool outside a shack. The few aircraft sitting in it had their security fields 
turned on. The second lot, where Dan had landed the Garrison-Laguna, looked more 
promising. The G-L and my wayward sibling were gone, but another pair of visitors were 
entering the gate on the way back to their transport. The man and woman were middle-
aged, wearing identical Hawaiian shirts and woven palm-leaf hats with feather bands. 
They had loaded carrier bags bearing the logo NANKI-POO'S TOY SHOPPE. 

"Yo!" I called out in a friendly fashion. "Hey, there, folks. Hold it just a minute, 
please. Did you enjoy your visit to Coventry Blue?" 

Expressions of guilty apprehension. Nobody ever wants to answer a customer survey. 
They scuttled toward a sleek Mitsubishi-Kondo that sat isolated in a far corner of the lot. 

The attendant, half zonked on some intoxicant, regarded us without interest. 

I said to Simon, "Let's cut out those two dogies and grab their ride. Cattleprods on 
medium zap." 

"Christ!" He was staring over my shoulder, appalled. "What the bloody blue blazes is 
that?" 

I turned to look. On the Strip about two blocks away was a tall building crowned by a 
revolving neon sign: CASINO ROYALE—LOWEST ODDS ON EARTH. Skidding around it onto 
the back street came a scarlet motorcycle with a cowl shielding the rider. Flickering 
strobe lights of red, white, and blue decorated the thing from stem to stern. 

I heard high-pitched hornet screams. A brace of small missiles smacked into the 
fuselage of one of the parked, field-screened hoppers and set off its intruder alarms and 
more bright flashing lights. 

The loopy attendant grinned. "Far out!" 

"Allenby magnum stun-guns!" I yelled to Simon. "Do the jackrabbit! We can't let 
those people take off without us." 

Stun-flechettes flew around us as we dodged and sidestepped, doing a zigzag run 
across the lot. The terrified tourists had dropped their shopping bags and were fleeing 
toward the Mitsubishi. 

I heard the roar of the motorcycle growing in volume and glanced back. The machine 
must have been traveling at 120 kph over the broken, potholed pavement, bouncing a 


meter or more into the air whenever it hit a bad patch, each time returning safely to earth 
with a resounding wham. Fortunately for us, the maneuvers of the daredevil driver played 
hell with his weapons targeting system, and the parked hoppers partially shielded us. 

The Hawaiian couple were climbing into their aircraft as I reached them. The missus 
cried out, "Willis! Hurry! Hurry!" 

The hatch was almost shut when I blocked it with my cattleprod and began wrenching 
it back open. Once again my mighty muscles did their stuff. A string of stun-flechettes 
hosed the hopper hull a couple of centimeters above my head but the door was slowly 
yielding. 

"Go away!" the tourist lady wept, kicking at me hysterically with her sneakered foot. 
"Oh, I knew coming here was a mistake!" 

Her husband had the engines turned on. I felt the Mitsubishi lurch as the antigrav 
engaged. Simon was on top of me as both of us shoved our way inside, pushing the poor 
woman from her banquette onto the deck. "Willis! Willis!" she screamed. "Help!" He 
looked over his shoulder, his face irresolute. I was afraid he'd abandon the controls and 
come to his wife's rescue. The door had shut. 

"Lift off!" I yelled, "Lift off, for God's sake, or we're all dead!" 

The hopper jolted skyward at an oblique angle like a badly aimed bottle rocket, 
coming to a halt at the 200-meter emergency holding level when Willis's frantic pawing 
at the controls threw the navigator into Reboot mode. He tumbled out of the pilot seat and 
came at me with his fists cocked. 

"Whoa, there, pardner!" I seized his wrists and held him firmly at bay. "We're not 
crooks or convicts. We're innocent tourists like yourselves. The bad guys are trying to kill 
us. They stole our hopper." 

Willis was getting a close look at us for the first time—me with my gaudy fire-opal 
bolo tie, Simon in his once-elegant suit, now much the worse for wear. 

"How do we know you're telling the truth?" wailed the lady on the floor. 

Simon reached down and tenderly helped her back onto the seat, switching on his 
charm like a megawatt floodlight. He pulled out a business card and presented it with a 
flourish. "Ma'am, I do sincerely apologize. And to you, too, sir, for commandeering your 
aircraft in such a boorish fashion. My name is Simon Frost and I'm the Chairman of the 
Board of Rampart Starcorp. This other gentleman is my son, Asa. I'll just ask him to 
unhand you now." 

I let the tourist go, giving him my friendliest smile. He was about sixty years old. His 
features had a slight Polynesian cast, he was in excellent physical shape, and he wore a 
professional spacer's chronometer on his wrist. His wife passed him Simon's card and he 
looked at it with suspicion. "May I ask your name?" my father inquired suavely. "I'm 
Willis Kanakoa. This is my wife, Leilani Peterson. What's this all about?" 

"You're in North America on vacation?" I asked. 

"Yes," said Leilani. "Who was that brute on the motorcycle shooting at us? Are his 
confederates going to come after us in a hopper?" 

"No, no," laughed Simon. "Convicts don't dare try to follow decent folks out of 
Coventry. Their chip implants would set off alarms. We're all perfectly safe now." 

"Hmph," Willis grunted dubiously. "Well, I think you two—" 

Simon broke in. "Citizen Kanakoa, would you be interested in making a great deal of 
money just for taking my son and me someplace we have to go? A brief two-hour flight. 


You might even like the place well enough to stay and visit." 

"Where's that?" Willis asked. 

I said, "Arizona. You'll love it there. Much quieter than Toronto." 

"Baldwin?" Alistair Drummond barks into the vidphone. "I'm having a serious 
problem with our agents assigned to this area." 

"What's the trouble, sir?" The Galapharma Security Chief is speaking from Concern 
headquarters in Glasgow. 

"Insubordination. Your bloody bastards here in Phoenix won't carry out my orders." 

Tyler Baldwin's eyes narrow and his voice changes its timbre, becoming less 
obsequious. "Sir, I've actually been informed about that matter already. A request of 
particular delicacy." 

"As a matter of fact, it was. I asked for a certain piece of equipment that I need for the 
Rampart board meeting at the ranch this afternoon. Your people won't give it to me. Flat 
out refused. They referred me to youl" 

"Yes. Well, you might want to reconsider—" 

"Get on the blower right now and tell your flunkies to obey orders!" 

Baldwin says, "I regret to say I can't do that, sir. Not with the situation in such a 
critical state of flux. What... I presume you intend to do with the equipment is simply not 
expedient. Not in the best interests of the other Concern trading partners in the Haluk 
consortium." 

"Damn you—what d'you think you're playing at?" Drum-mond roars. "Do as I say or 
you're finished! Terminated! Do you hear what I'm saying? Not only fired, but—" 

The phone screen goes to standby. Tyler Baldwin has ended the transmission. 

The other Concern trading partners? 

Baffled and furious, Drummond sits frozen before the desk in his villa at the 
Biltmore. What does Baldwin mean? Has news of the imminent filing of the civil suit by 
Rampart leaked out? Or have the Big Seven conspirators learned of the Macrodur 
prospectus? Did that lot of stone-faced fuckers at Bodascon and Sheltok and Carnelian 
and Homerun think he, Alistair Drummond, was going to concede defeat? 

The telephone chimes. If it's Baldwin again, with more insolence— 

He stabs at the Open keypad. The face on the screen is that of Daniel Frost. The 
screen graphics indicate that he is calling from a hoppercraft in flight. 

Dan says, "I have the proxies of Simon and Asa." 

"Well, I'll be gormed!" murmurs Alistair Drummond. 

"When we get to the ranch, I'll feed Eve a line of bullshit to explain the absence of 
Simon and Asa at the board meeting. She won't be able to do a thing about it. The CEO 
can't cancel or postpone the vote because I now hold the convening privilege of a 
majority stake. We're scheduled to meet at 1530 hours local time. I'll pick you up at the 
hotel half an hour before that and fly you to the ranch myself." 

"Most satisfactory," Drummond says. 

Damn near astounding! 

He touches the End pad, sits back and closes his eyes. When he is once again in 
control of himself, he mulls over the new development, especially as it applies to his 
earlier frustrated request. 

It occurs to him that someone else in the Galapharma organization, a local Concern 
executive not under the thumb of Tyler Baldwin, might be persuaded to furnish the piece 


of equipment he needs—or a reasonable substitute. In spite of the unexpected triumph of 
Daniel Frost, he still fully intends to carry out his own ultimate solution of the Rampart 
problem, a solution that particularly includes the egregious Daniel himself. 

Smiling, he touches the phone's keypad and calls up a new number. 

Simon and I briefly contemplated transferring to a speedier rented aircraft, but I was 
afraid that King Farley would have notified Dan of our escape by now. Wile E. Coyote 
wouldn't panic. He'd put out a credit-card-theft alert, ensuring that we'd be nabbed and 
detained if we tried to obtain any sort of commercial transport. Picking up a Rampart 
hopper in Toronto might have been a risky move for us, too, if Dan had spun some wild 
yarn to the corporate flight office. 

So we stuck with bemused Willis and Leilani. Like most visitors to Coventry Blue, 
the Hawaiians had illegally suppressed their hopper registration to preserve their 
anonymity. There was no way King Farley or his biker buddy could identify our getaway 
vehicle to Dan, the Gala security forces, or anyone else. 

We had effectively vanished. 

As we flew southwest at over 1,500 kph, Simon wanted to contact Eve to tell her 
what had happened. I nixed the notion. It seemed to me there was a very real possibility 
that Dan had gone back to Rampart Tower after dumping us in Coventry and picked up 
Eve, Zed, and Gunter for the flight to Arizona. He might have told them that Simon and I 
had decided to fly down separately, or recited some other cock-and-bull story. If we tried 
to call Eve on her personal phone while she was aboard the Garrison-Laguna, Dan might 
somehow be alerted to the situation and panic. At worst, he might harm Eve and the 
others in some act of desperation. At best, he'd put off the vote. 

I didn't want either thing to happen. I was counting on my brother being unwilling to 
confess the Silver Scybalum fiasco to Alistair Drummond. I wanted the Galapharma CEO 
to attend the board meeting at the Sky Ranch, to come out of his spider-hole of 
invulnerability. 

His insane chutzpah deserved an appropriate reward. Perhaps I'd be the one to give it 
to him. 

It was 1440 hours when Willis Kanakoa's Mitsubishi arrived at the Turkey Spring 
Guardhouse at the southeastern corner of the Frost family spread. It wasn't the main 
entrance to the ranch. That one, providing convenient access to the Phoenix Conurbation, 
was situated thirty-five crow-flight kilometers away on the western perimeter, near the 
Jakes Corner crossing on Tonto Creek. The only people who used the eastside gate were 
ranch employees who lived in Globe or in the remote little town of Pleasant Valley about 
twenty kilometers to the north. 

August is monsoon season in Arizona, and masses of ominous purple thunderheads 
were building up south of Copper Mountain and Greenback Peak as we went into a 
holding hover. 

Willis said, "Don't think I want to be flying around here when that weather arrives." 

"Don't worry. This is where Simon and I get out." I instructed him to hail the 
guardhouse and ask if he could touch down for a minute or two and check out a possible 
malfunction in the hopper's throttle. The transponder ID was working again, so the 
Hawaiian registration of his aircraft was evident: just another tourist, snooping around the 
Sierra Ancha wilderness and getting into trouble. 

Sky Ranch guards have standing orders to be reasonably polite to rubberneckers. 


They told Willis to come on down and they'd do what they could to help. He landed on 
the pad beside one of the small Saxon-15 hoppers that ExSec used to patrol the spread. 
There was also a Rampart Jeep parked there, and a couple of pickup trucks that probably 
belonged to the guards. 

"Time for us to say goodbye, folks," Simon said to the Hawaiians. "Remember what I 
said: call me day after tomorrow. If Asa and I are still alive then, you're invited to the 
biggest goddamn barbecue this territory's ever seen. Now get outta here." 

My father and I climbed out of the Mitsubishi and it took off at once. The heat was 
excruciating, even though we were at an altitude of over 1,800 meters, and the air was 
dead calm. We trudged to the guardhouse, a small building set among tall ponderosa 
pines. Not far away was the tall locked gate flanked by scanner masts, with a sign posted 
on it. 

PRIVATE PROPERTY OF RAMPART 1C 

ABSOLUTELY NO PUBLIC ACCESS 

DANGER! CUIDADO! LETHAL DETERRENTS IN USE 

A uniformed man with the holster of his sidearm unfastened was standing at the open 
guardhouse door regarding us warily. 

"That you, Pete Halvorsen?" Simon called out. 

"Good God!" the guard exclaimed. A smile broke over his weathered face. He 
hollered to somebody inside, "Julio, never mind reportin' in. You get on out here! It's the 
boss, for chrissake!" 

Another guard appeared, older than the first. There were jovial curses of surprise. 
Simon knew both men, but he cut short their chatter after introducing me. 

I said, "Julio, did you get around to telling Central Security that you had visitors out 
here?" 

"Nossir," said Julio Perez. "I was just getting on it when Pete said it was the boss." 

"Good. We don't want anyone to know we're corning in." 

"What's up?" Pete asked. 

Simon said, "We got some bad shit comin' down, boys. It's nothing I want to explain 
to you right now. We need a Jeep ride in to the main house." 

"Sure thing," said Pete. "I'll take you. Ol' Julio can keep an eye on things here." 

"We'll drive ourselves," I said. 

"Suit yourself, son. Key's in the rig. Remote control for the security checkpoints 
clipped on the sun visor. Reckon you know the drill." 

"Do you have a stunner we can take along?" I asked. "And a Claus-Gewitter or some 
other kind of blaster?" 

"Well, shoot!" said Pete. "You planning a home invasion?" 

"Got an extra Ivanov," Julio said soberly, "and a Harvey HA-3 if you want some 
important artillery. I'll get them." 

"Perfect." I turned to Pete. "Remember, don't let anyone at the main house or the 
Central Security station know that Simon and I are coming in the Jeep. You get any 
inquiries, say that Julio's driving around on road inspection or something." 

"I understand." The guard's face was grim. "You can count on us." 

Simon clapped him on the shoulder. "Tell you later 'bout the reeraw. With luck, it 
won't amount to anything." 

Julio came out and handed me the guns. "You take care. And keep an eye on Copper 


Creek when you cross her. Might flood out suddenly. Helluva big storm coming." 

"Wouldn't surprise me," Simon said glumly. 

The two men went back into their air-conditioned guardhouse. I slipped into the 
driver's seat of the Jeep and started it up. A moment later the back gate to the Sky Ranch 
rolled open and we drove inside. 

The time was 1505 hours. The board meeting was scheduled to begin in twenty-five 
minutes, and it would take us at least that long to get to the house via the winding dirt 
road. 

Eight members of the Rampart Board of Directors have gathered in the living room of 
the ranch house, awaiting the arrival of the ninth and his special guest. An atmosphere of 
decorum prevails. No one speaks of looming calamity or exhibits unseemly enthusiasm in 
anticipation of the event they all know will shortly take place. The weather provides a 
useful topic for small talk. 

The living room is a place of mellow oaken beams, polished floor tiles, and informal 
furniture upholstered in subdued southwestern Indian motifs. An enormous unlit hearth 
overflows with potted ferns and jars containing sprays of pink, white, and green orchids. 
Beyond a wall of glass doors, closed against the oppressive heat, a broad terrace 
overlooks a stupendous vista. The house stands on a rise in the midst of a sparsely 
wooded plateau and it is almost completely encircled by mountains. The peaks to the 
south stand in striking contrast to a backdrop of towering cumulonimbus clouds— 
brilliant white at the tops and nearly black at their bases. Lightning flickers redly in their 
depths, and from time to time a distant growl of thunder is audible, even inside the 
heavily insulated house. 

In the absence of Simon, Eve Frost has assumed the role of host. She wears a hooded 
robe of sparkling salmon-colored fabric, and her Halukoid features are frankly revealed. 
She serves crystal tumblers of sangria to those assembled and is particularly solicitous of 
her elderly aunt, Emma Bradbury, who seems to be the only one among the directors who 
does not understand the enormity of what is about to happen. 

Zared Frost, President and COO, stands near the patio doors with his close associates, 
Leonidas Dunne, Chief Technical Officer, and Gianliborio Rivello, Chief Marketing 
Officer. Zed seems to have regained his executive poise. The three men watch the 
monsoon begin to engulf the mountain rampart with a gray curtain of falling water. They 
discuss the prospects of the Arizona Diamondbacks baseball team in the World Series. 

Sitting together at a cocktail table made of polished petrified wood are Thora 
Scranton, a director-at-large who controls the twenty-five percent of Rampart stock 
owned by the Small Stakeholders, Gunter Eckert, the veteran CFO, and Bethany Frost, 
the Assistant Chief Financial Officer. Thora is an elegant woman of ample proportions, 
whose air of maternal calm conceals a ruthlessly pragmatic mind. Beth, a brilliant 
mathematician, is the designated successor to Gunter. Her election to the board after the 
death of Yasser Abul Hadi was pressed by Zed, Gianni, Leo, Emma, Dan, and the late 
Katje Vanderpost over the objections of Simon, who considers his younger daughter still 
too immature to play a leadership role in the Starcorp. Beth, like her brother Dan, to 
whom she is devoted, strongly favors the Galapharma merger. 

A houseman in a white jacket slips into the room and whispers to Eve. She says to the 
others, "It seems that Dan has arrived with his guest." 

A murmur, almost a sigh, sweeps the room. Then there is silence except for the 


intensifying drumrolls of thunder. A moment later Daniel Frost enters, his presence 
almost completely overshadowed by the flamboyant man following on his heels. 

Alistair Drummond seems almost to be enveloped in an aura of crackling energy, as 
though he has managed to siphon ions from the impending storm. His cowboy costume, 
far from looking inappropriate, gives him the aspect of a Western stalwart of old. 
Supremely self-confident and smiling, he approaches Eve Frost, takes her dusky blue 
mutant hand, and inclines his head in a courtly gesture that is just short of mockery. 

"Thank you so very much for allowing me to attend your board meeting, Eve! I can't 
tell you what a great pleasure it is to meet you at last." 

She nods, turning away from him almost at once to address the others. "It's time for 
our meeting to begin. Please gather in the chairs around the fireplace." 

Those who are not already seated take their places. Only Eve and Alistair Drummond 
remain standing. He silently declines to take the chair she has indicated. 

"Ladies and gentlemen, this meeting of the Rampart Board of Directors will now 
come to order. We will dispense with the reading of the minutes by our esteemed 
Secretary"—an ironic nod to Dan—"and move on immediately to the principal business 
at hand, our consideration of the acquisition bid by Galapharma Amalgamated Concern." 

"I move that the Galapharma tender be accepted," says Daniel Frost. 

"I second the motion," says his cousin Zared. 

"The motion is now open to discussion." Almost in relief, Eve sits down on a padded 
stool to the left of the fireplace. 

Dan says, "Since this matter has been extensively discussed and voted upon by the 
board before, I would like to invite my guest, Alistair Drummond, Chairman and CEO of 
Galapharma Concern, to tell us the advantages that may accrue to Rampart Starcorp, its 
stakeholders and employees, should this motion be passed today." 

Drummond steps forward and begins to speak. His voice is well-modulated and 
forceful. Its faint Scottish accent, perhaps deliberately intensified for the occasion, lends 
an exotic charm to even the most banal recitations of statistics. He has brought an 
electronic display slate with him in a large case, and its muted holograms illustrate and 
elucidate his remarks. 

As he winds down to a conclusion, the onrushing storm reaches the buildings of the 
Sky Ranch at last. A clap of thunder shakes the main house, provoking startled laughter. 
Rain descends in a torrential cascade, rattling on the roof and sluicing the terrace 
windows. Outside, it has become almost as dark as night. 

The living room lamps brighten automatically, compensating for the gloom. So do 
Drummond's splendid holos. Offhandedly, the Galapharma CEO makes mention of the 
impending participation of Macrodur in the new venture credit program and 
acknowledges the near certainty that a new treaty with the Haluk will be approved. The 
data are all smoothly incorporated into his grand new schema. He seems to have thought 
of everything. 

His presentation comes to an end and a few people applaud. Smiling, he deactivates 
the display and replaces it in its case, which rests on the beautiful table of petrified wood. 
"Are there any questions from members of the board?" 

No one says a word. 

Eve rises. "Then I call for a vote by the Rampart stakeholders and their 
representatives. First: Emma Bradbury, with twelve and a half percent of the corporate 


stake." 

"Aye," Emma says, almost dreamily. 

"Next: Thora Scranton, representative of Rampart Small Stakeholders, with twenty-
five percent." 

"Aye," says Thora. 

"Next, Asahel Frost, with twenty-five percent." Dan holds up the document. "I hold 
the proxy of Asahel Frost, and vote aye." 

"Madame CEO?" says Gunter Eckert. "Point of order." She nods. Eckert says he 
wishes to examine the proxy document. Dan hands it over and the old man makes a 
minute examination, finally shrugging and returning it. "The document appears to be 
authentic, but I insist that it be verified by an independent technical authority before the 
results of this vote are inserted into the public database." 

"I agree wholeheartedly with Gunter's quite legitimate request," Dan says. 

"Very well," says Eve. "The final stakeholder vote is by Simon Frost, with thirty-
seven and one-half percent of Rampart stock." 

Again Dan lifts the document. "I hold the proxy of Simon Frost and vote aye." 

"And I once again stipulate verification." But Gunter's voice is tired and perfunctory 
now and he is staring into his lap. 

"A vote of Rampart stakeholders has been taken," Eve says, "and acceptance of the 
Galapharma tender is unanimous, subject to the verification of the two proxies. Do I have 
a motion for adjournment?" "I so move," says Zared Frost. "I second," says Gunter. "And 
God help the lot of us." At this point the glass terrace doors burst open. A tremendous 
gust of wind and rain batters the living room, sending lamps, throw pillows, and precious 
Native American pottery flying, lifting small rugs from the floor, and causing the window 
drapes to billow and crack like torn sails in a gale. 

Emma Bradbury and Bethany Frost shriek and cower in their club chairs. Eve turns a 
serene face to the invading storm, almost seeming to welcome it. Daniel Frost is a gray 
statue, clutching the proxy document to his breast like a talisman against disaster. 
Leonidas Dunne and Gianliborio Riv-ello leap up, mouthing curses, and dash to secure 
the flailing French doors before they shatter. 

They fall back in confusion as two tall figures, drenched to the skin, step past them 
into the living room. 

I kept on walking, reached Dan's paralyzed form, and ripped the proxy slate out of his 
nerveless hand. "This document is null and void. It was obtained under duress and is 
completely worthless." I flung the thing onto the floor tiles and crushed it under my boot. 

Behind me Simon bellowed, "Damn right! And this fuckin' farce ends right now." 

Alistair Drummond turned without a word and strode toward the door. 

Dan shouted, "Wait! You can't leave!" He started after Drummond, taking hold of his 
shoulder, trying to stop him. 

Incredibly, Drummond halted, reached into an inner pocket of his vest, pulled out a 
small but powerful Lanvin actinic pistol, and shot my older brother in the chest. Then he 
spun about and ran down the hall toward the front door, leaving chaos behind him. 

I headed in the opposite direction, to the French windows that led onto the terrace. 
"Simon!" I yelled. "You've got my proxy. Take another vote and transmit the results to 
the public database immediately!" 

"Gotcha!" said Pop. 


"Eve—you get on the com to Ranch Central Security. Tell them to expect my orders." 
Then I was outside and moving. 

Water impounded by the parapets, falling too heavily to drain away, made a shallow 
lake of the flagstones. I splashed across it, hopped over the rail, and bounded through 
ornamental shrubs and smashed flowers. 

A monster bolt of lightning illuminated the grounds around the big house. Even then, 
visibility in the downpour was less than fifty meters. A planting of slender cottonwood 
trees was bent almost flat by the wind and sturdier pines tossed and moaned. 

The Jeep was where Simon and I had left it, pulled up on the formerly pristine 
irrigated lawn at the end of two horrendous ruts. I spotted a couple of blurred red 
taillights going down the front drive. It looked like Dan's Range Rover. For an instant I 
wondered why Drummond hadn't taken the Garrison-Laguna, which was parked on the 
house landing pad. Then I realized that a hopper would need security clearance to 
penetrate the Sky Ranch's scanner net. If it tried to break through, the automated Kagi 
installations would shoot it down. 

Diving into the Jeep, I fired it up, hit the Max Traction control, and roared off the 
lawn in reverse. Clots of turf and muddy water sprayed roof-high. I reached pavement, 
shifted, and tore off in pursuit of Alistair Drummond. 

The Rover's lights, dim red eyes bouncing and jinking, were still in sight. He was 
heading south to the T-junction where the blacktop ended, about two kilometers from the 
house. From there, all the ranch roads were unpaved. The west leg of the T, well-graded 
gravel, led to the main entrance and the Phoenix Freeway. The east leg, rougher and with 
fewer bridges over the creeks and arroyos, was the utility road Simon and I had come in 
on. 

Drummond turned east. 

I got on the com. "Security Central, come back to Helly Frost." 

"Yes, .sir!" 

"Get on the global positioner. Nail down Mr. Dan's green Range Rover going along 
the East Road and feed it to the navigator in"—I checked the ID of Pete's Jeep—
"Rampart Patrol Three-two." 

"Roger that. Acquiring target. Downloading. You got it, sir." 

I switched on the nav display. There we were, two blips half a klick apart. He was 
pulling away. "Thanks, Central. Can you send aircraft to cover the east gate?" 

"That's a negative right now, sir. As soon as this monster storm cell moves through 
we can go flying. Estimated plus-minus seven minutes. We'll alert the East Gatehouse, 
but—" 

"Do you have any ground units between the house and Copper Mountain Cutoff?" 

"Negative. And I gotta tell you that West Fork Copper Creek is running bank-high. 
Your bogey won't ford it and neither will you." 

"I copy that. Standby." 

It was taking almost all of my attention to keep the Jeep on the road. I was barreling 
along at nearly 90 kph on a rough, devilishly slick track in a vehicle that was only about a 
third as massive as the one I was chasing. The Rover stuck to the ground much better 
than I did. It had a more powerful engine, too. The Jeep windshield was doing its 
damnedest to stay clear, but the amount of water flowing over it threatened to overwhelm 
the ionizer. 


I slowed down and shifted part of my vision to the navigator. In just a few more 
minutes Alistair Drummond was going to butt up against that torrential creek, at which 
point he faced some uncomfortable options. He could turn left and drive cross-country 
over the plateau until he foundered, or he could turn right onto an exiguous two-rut trail 
that headed toward the summit of Copper Mountain, eventually dead-ending near the 
abandoned gold mine. The opposite side of the mountain was much too steep for 
vehicular travel. Only horses or hikers could make it down that way. 

If he was smart, Drummond would pull off somewhere along the track and ambush 
me. I wondered if he had any other weapons besides the nasty actinic peashooter he'd 
shot Dan with. Most of the ranch ground vehicles carried a stunner, at the very least, to 
cope with rampageous wildlife. I had my trusty Harvey, which would bring down a 
tyrannosaur. 

Provided I got it in my sights. 

The rain seemed to be abating and we were back in daylight mode. I was coming up 
on a rise, so I stopped the Jeep. Since I had no oculars, I grabbed the Harvey blaster and 
went out to do a fast recon through its powerscope. It was suddenly cold outside. The air 
temp must have dropped nearly twenty degrees. Lightning still flared occasionally, but 
the principal fireworks had passed to the north. 

I stumbled up the road to the top of the ridge, crouched behind some rabbit brush on 
the verge, and swept the land below with the scope. There was the creek, bordered by 
bebb willows and alamos and brimming with a brown, foamy torrent. No sign of the 
Range Rover. 

I strained my ears and heard a laboring turbine engine, the sound intermittent among 
the rumbles and dull thuds of retreating thunder. 

I skidded back to the car and consulted the navigator. There he was, the crazy dude 
bastard, heading up the mountain— and rather briskly at that. I notified Security Central 
and told them to send armed hoppers to the area but not to land or fire on the bogey until 
I gave the order. 

I got rolling again and turned onto the cutoff road in pursuit of my prey. Then I 
switched to Channel 16 and called Alistair Drummond. 

It took a few minutes for him to notice the little green telltale blinking on the com 
console, figure out what it meant, and come back to me. 

I said, "You know the track you're on ends up near the mountaintop. You're finished, 
Drummond. You might as well give up." 

A laugh, soft and eerie, came out of my speaker. All he said was, "It's your family 
that's finished, Asahel Frost. And the day will come when I put an end to you as well." 

"Drummond? You want to explain that? Drummond?" 

There was no reply. 

Jesus... Of course that's what he'd do! 

Still driving, I got back to security and told them to patch me through to the house 
and my sister Eve. Interminable minutes later I heard her voice say, "Asa? What's 
happening? Did he get away?" 

"Never mind that! Did Drummond leave anything behind? Anything at all?" 

"Only the case with his holo display. Why?" 

"Get out of the house!" I shouted. "Get everybody out of the house now! The 
bastard's going to kill you all. There's something in that case!" 


Silence. 

"Eve! Do you understand?" 

"Yes," she said. And was gone. 

 

I prayed, and I drove like a fiend, pushing the Jeep to its limits, cracking the 
undercarriage against rocks, scraping the sides on hairy switchbacks, winding up to the 
summit of Copper Mountain while the rain diminished and the beauty of the Sky Ranch 
spread out around me. 

Dan and Eve and Beth and I had played on this mountain when we were young 
children. We'd been forbidden to enter the derelict gold mine, so of course we did. One 
time, a black-tail rattler hiding just inside the entrance struck at Beth. I crushed it with a 
rock. Another tune, Dan found a nubbin of quartz with embedded metallic specks that 
gleamed in the sun. He knew it was real gold. The rest of us sneered, but we thought it 
was, too. Lucky Dan! He said he'd reopen the mine when he grew up, dig out the gold, 
and get rich. We all sneered at that as well, while we halfway suspected he might do just 
that. Wily Dan! 

Wile E. Coyote. 

Too young yet to know that, in a galactic economy, gold wasn't all that valuable. 
Even the wily can miscalculate. Sometimes fatally. 

The trail was almost too narrow to drive on now, hacked from living rock, incredibly 
steep and with sheer drops into Copper Creek Canyon far below. It had been built for 
mule-drawn carts and not modern vehicles, but if the Rover had made it, my Jeep would, 
too. I kept moving, traveling at less than 7 kph, and finally reached a lookout point close 
to the summit where most of the Frost spread was visible. 

The clouds were beginning to break and a few beams of sunlight appeared. Where 
were the damned hoppers? Finally I saw them, three specks rising from the big landing 
field north of the main building— 

And an expanding bloom of orange fire. 

No. 

I screamed, "No!" Did it over and over again. 

The fireball turned black and became an umbrella of smoke. 

Could they have made it out in time? I reached for the com, saw the green light 
blinking, touched the pad to open Channel 16. 

"Say goodbye to them, Asahel Frost!" 

Something large went hurtling overhead, flying off the sheer-sided switchback just 
above me. At first I didn't realize that it was the Range Rover. Then the car was clearly 
visible, turning over and over so very slowly until it struck the rocks two hundred meters 
below and disappeared in a second fireball, much smaller than the first. 

I started driving again, out of it. Uncomprehending. 

In my shock and grief I had the ludicrous idea that if I reached the old mine where 
we'd played as kids everything would be different. A proper happy ending. The sun shone 
on the wet rocks. A bird was singing. The hoppers were coming and a red telltale blinked 
on the com unit. I ignored it. 

The top. The muddy, rock-strewn level area in front of the broken-down shacks and 
rusted machinery of mysterious function. The precipice where Alistair Drummond had 
plunged to his death. I opened the car door and got out, taking the Harvey with me. 


At the dropoff I used the gunscope to spy out the wreckage. Smoke coiled up from 
amid some scrub oaks and stunted ponderosas. Two ExSec hoppers were heading down 
into the canyon to investigate. Another one circled high above Copper Mountain, 
checking me out. 

My hands were shaking a little so I dropped to one knee to get a steadier view— 

Chweek! 

The beam from the small actinic pistol missed me by centimeters, fired from the 
direction of the mine-shaft opening. 

Oh, you crafty bastard! 

He had ambushed me after all. 

I ate mud. Rolled sideways, bruising my body on sharp rocks, found a boulder the 
size of an office wastebasket, puny shelter for someone my size. 

Chweek! Chweek! Chweek! Chweek! 

Fountains of goop and puffs of chipped rock. 1 was almost out of his range and it was 
nearly impossible to shoot a gun that tiny with any kind of accuracy. But Alistair 
Drummond was doing all right, peppering me from the shelter of the mine entrance. He 
scorched my right thigh. It hurt like hell. Another beam caught me on the shoulder, 
setting my sodden shirt afire. I slapped the flame out. Then one of his shots sent a chip of 
rock into my left eye. My vision on that side dissolved in red fog. 

Okay. That does it! 

Heedless of the deadly white beams, I fired my Harvey into the rock face above the 
dark opening. Once. Twice. Three times. 

Thunder returned, echoing across the crags, making the ground shudder. Tons of 
ancient rock cascaded down, loosened by my big blaster. Rocks poured into the old mine 
entrance, collapsed the supporting timbers, refilled the hole, obliterating it. 

I stood up, burned and half blinded, a muddy wreck. 

But Alistair Drummond was buried. Just like a rabid skunk. 

Slowly, I shuffled back to the Jeep. The red light on the com unit was still blinking. 
Collapsing behind the wheel, I touched the pad. 

"Asahel Frost here." My voice was slurred. I'd bruised my lower lip, too. 

"Asa—it's Eve! Everyone in the house got out in time, including the staff. And Dan. 
He's alive. Are you all right?" 

"Could be better... You get that board vote into the public record?" 

"Oh, yes. Rampart's safe. Galapharma can't hurt the Star-corp now. We've won, Asa, 
whatever the outcome of our civil suit." 

"How's Simon?" 

"Subdued. Shocked. Rather pissed off because he'll have to postpone the big 
barbecue. But never mind that! Tell me— what's happened to Alistair Drummond? We 
had a report from security that his car had gone off the mountain." 

A Rampart hoppercraft was hovering immediately overhead. I could hear someone 
calling out to me on the annunciator. 

"Evie, I'll be down there before you know it, and I'll tell you everything. Gotta go 
now." 

"Goodbye, Asa. Love you." 

I shut down the com unit. Outside, an amplified voice was saying: "Exit your car! 
You are surrounded. Exit your car! Surrender and you will not be harmed!" 


I said, "Easy for you to say." 

Then I climbed out with my hands raised over my head and waited. 

 


