                                  
                           The Day it Rained Forever
                                      1959

     The  hotel  stood  like  a  hollowed  dry bone under the very centre of the
desert  sky  where the sun burned the roof all day. All night, the memory of the
sun stirred in every room like the ghost of an old forest fire. Long after dusk,
since  light  meant  heat,  the  hotel lights stayed off. The inhabitants of the
hotel  preferred to feel their way blind through the halls in their never-ending
search for cool air.
     This  one  particular  evening  Mr.  Terle,  the  proprietor,  and his only
boarders,  Mr.  Smith  and  Mr. Fremley, who looked and smelled like two ancient
rags  of  cured  tobacco,  stayed  late  on  the long veranda. In their creaking
glockenspiel  rockers, they gasped back and forth in the dark, trying to rock up
a wind.
     "Mr. Terle...? Wouldn't it berealty nice... some day... if you could buy...
air conditioning...?"
     Mr. Terle coasted a while, eyes shut.
     "Got no money for such things, Mr. Smith."
     The  two  old  boarders  Hushed;  they hadn't paid a bill now in twenty-one
years.
     Much later, Mr. Fremley sighed a grievous sigh. "Why, why don't we all just
quit,  pack  up, get out a here, move to a decent city? Stop this swelterin' and
fryin' and sweat-in'."
     "Who'd buy a dead hotel in a ghost town?" said Mr. Terle, quietly. "No. No,
we'll just set here and wait, wait for that great day, January 29th."
     Slowly, all three men stopped rocking.
     January 29th.
     The one day in all the year when it really let go and rained.
     "Won't  wait  long." Mr. Smith tilted his gold railroad watch like the warm
summer  moon  in his palm. "Two hours and nine minutes from now it'll be January
29th. But I don't see nary a cloud in ten thousand miles."
     "It's  rained  every  January  29th  since  I was born!" Mr. Terle stopped,
surprised  at  his  own  loud voice. "If it's a day late this year, I won't pull
God's shirt-tail."
     Mr.  Fremley  swallowed hard and looked from east to west across the desert
towards  the  hills.  "I  wonder...  will  there  ever be a gold rush hereabouts
again?"
     "No  gold,"  said Mr. Smith. "And what's more, I'll make you a bet no rain.
No  rain  tomorrow or the day after the day after tomorrow. No rain all the rest
of this year."
     The  three  old  men sat staring at the big sun-yellowed moon that burned a
hole in the high stillness.
     After a long while, painfully, they began to rock again.

     
     The  first  hot  morning  breezes  curled  the  calendar pages like a dried
snakeskin against the flaking hotel front.
     The three men, thumbing their braces up over their hat-rack shoulders, came
barefoot downstairs to blink out at that idiot sky.
     "January 29th..."
     "Not a drop of mercy there."
     "Day's young."
     "I'm not." Mr. Fremley turned and went away.
     It  took him five minutes to find his way up through the delirious hallways
to his hot, freshly baked bed.
     At noon, Mr. Terle peered in.
     "Mr. Fremley...?"
     "Damn  desert cactus, that's us!" gasped Mr. Fremley, lying there, his face
looking  as  if  at  any  moment it might fall away in a blazing dust on the raw
plank  floor.  "But  even  the  best damn cactus got to have just a sip of water
before it goes back to another year of the same damn furnace. I tell you I won't
move again, I'll lie here an' die if I don't hear more than birds pattin' around
up on that roof!"
     "Keep  your  prayers  simple  and your umbrella handy," said Mr. Terle, and
tiptoed away.
     At dusk, on the hollow roof a faint pattering sounded.
     Mr. Fremley's voice sang out mournfully, from his bed.
     "Mr.  Terle,  that  ain't  rain! That's you with the garden hose sprinklin'
well-water on the roof! Thanks for tryin', but cut it out, now."
     The pattering sound stopped. There was a sigh from the yard below.
     Coming  around  the  side  of  the  hotel a moment later, Mr. Terle saw the
calendar fly out and down in the dust.
     "Damn  January  29th!"  cried  a  voice.  "Twelve more months! Have to wait
twelve more months, now!"

     
     Mr.  Smith was standing there in the doorway. He stepped inside and brought
out two dilapidated suitcases and thumped them on the porch.
     "Mr. Smith!" cried Mr. Terle. "You can't leave after thirty years!"
     "They  say  it rains twenty days a month in Ireland," said Mr. Smith. "I'll
get a job there and run around with my hat off and my mouth open."
     "You  can't  go!"  Mr.  Terle  tried  frantically to think of something; he
snapped his fingers. "You owe me nine thousand dollars rent!"
     Mr.  Smith  recoiled;  his eyes got a look of tender and unexpected hurt in
them.
     "I'm  sorry." Mr. Terle looked away. "I didn't mean that. Look now you just
head  for Seattle. Pours two inches a week there. Pay me when you can, or never.
But do me a favour: wait till midnight. It's cooler then, anyhow. Get you a good
night's walk towards the city."
     "Nothin'll happen between now and midnight."
     "You  got to have faith. When everything else is gone, you got to believe a
thing'll  happen.  Just  stand  here, with me, you don't have to sit, just stand
here and think of rain. That's the last thing I'll ever ask of you."
     On  the  desert,  sudden little whirlwinds of dust twisted up, sifted down.
Mr. Smith's eye scanned the sunset horizon.
     "What do I think? Rain, oh you rain, come along here? Stuff like that?"
     "Anything. Anything at all!"
     Mr. Smith stood for a long time between his two mangy suitcases and did not
move.  Five,  six  minutes  ticked  by.  There  was no sound, save the two men's
breathing in the dusk.
     Then at last, very firmly, Mr. Smith stooped to grasp the luggage handles.
     Just  then,  Mr.  Terle blinked. He leaned forward, cupping his hand to his
ear.
     Mr. Smith froze, his hands still on the luggage.
     From away among the hills, a murmur, a soft and tremulous rumble.
     "Storm coming!" hissed Mr. Terle.
     The sound grew louder; a kind of whitish cloud rose up from the hills.
     Mr. Smith stood tall on tiptoe.
     Upstairs, Mr. Fremley sat up like Lazarus.
     Mr.  Terle's eyes grew wider and yet wider to take hold of what was coming.
He  held to the porch rail like the captain of a longbecalmed vessel feeling the
first  stir  of  some  tropic breeze that smelted of lime and the ice-cool white
meat  of coconut. The smallest wind stroked over his aching nostrils as over the
flues of a white-hot chimney.
     "There!" cried Mr. Terle. "There!"
     And over the last hill, shaking out feathers of fiery dust, came the cloud,
the thunder, the racketing storm.

     
     Over  the  hill, the first car to pass in twenty days flung itself down the
valley with a shriek, a thud, and a wail.
     Mr. Terle did not dare to look at Mr. Smith.
     Mr. Smith looked up, thinking of Mr. Fremley in his room.
     Mr.  Fremley,  at the window, looked down and saw the car expire and die in
front of the hotel.
     For  the  sound  that  the car made was curiously final. It had come a very
long way on blazing sulphur roads, across salt flats abandoned ten million years
ago by the shingling-off of waters. Now, with wire-ravellings like cannibal hair
sprung  up  from seams, with a great eyelid of canvas top thrown back and melted
to  spearmint  gum  over rear seat, the auto, a Kissel car, vintage 1924, gave a
final shuddering as if to expel its ghost upon the air.
     The  old woman in the front seat of the car waited patiently, looking in at
the  three  men  and  the hotel as if to say, Forgive me, my friend is ill; I've
known  him  a  long while, and now I must see him through his final hour. So she
just sat in the car waiting for the faint convulsions to cease and for the great
relaxation  of all the bones which signifies that the final process is over. She
must  have  sat  a  full  half-minute longer listening to her car, and there was
something  so  peaceful  about  her  that  Mr. Terle and Mr. Smith leaned slowly
towards her. At last she looked at them with a grave smile and raised her hand.
     Mr.  Fremley  was surprised to see his hand go out the window above, waving
back to her.
     On  the  porch, Mr. Smith murmured, "Strange. It's not a storm. And I'm not
disappointed. How come?"
     But Mr. Terle was down the path and to the car.
     "We  thought  you were... that is..." He trailed off. "Terle's my name, Joe
Terle."
     She  took  his  hand  and looked at him with absolutely clear and unclouded
light-blue  eyes  like  water that has melted from snow a thousand miles off and
come a long way, purified by wind and sun.
     "Miss  Blanche  Hillgood,"  she  said,  quietly.  "Graduate of the Grinnell
College,  unmarried  teacher  of  music,  thirty  years highschool glee club and
student  orchestra  conductor, Green City, Iowa, twenty years private teacher of
piano,  harp,  and  voice,  one  month  retired and living on a pension and now,
taking my roots with me, on my way to California."
     "Miss Hillgood, you don't look to be going anywhere from here."
     "I  had  a  feeling  about  that."  She watched the two men circle the car,
cautiously.  She  sat  like  a  child  on  the  lap  of a rheumatic grandfather,
undecided. "Is there nothing we can do?"
     "Make  a  fence  of the wheels, dinner-gong of the brake drums, the rest'll
make a fine rock garden."
     Mr. Fremley shouted from the sky. "Dead? I say, is the car dead? I can feel
it from here! Well - it's way past time for supper!"
     Mr.  Terle  put  out  his  hand.  "Miss Hillgood, that there is Joe Terle's
Desert Hotel, open twenty-six hours a day. Gila monsters and road runners please
register  before  going upstairs. Get you a night's sleep, free, we'll knock our
Ford off its blocks and drive you to the city come morning."
     She  let  herself  be  helped  from  the  car. The machine groaned as if in
protest at her going. She shut the door carefully, with a soft click.
     "One  friend gone, but the other still with me. Mr. Terle, could you please
bring her in out of the weather?"
     "Her, ma'am?"
     "Forgive me, I never think of things but what they're people. The car was a
man,  I suppose, because it took me places. But a harp, now, don't you agree, is
famale?"
     She  nodded to the rear seat of the car. There, tilted against the sky like
an  ancient  scrolled  leather  ship-prow  cleaving the wind, stood a case which
towered  above any driver who might sit up in front and sail the desert calms or
the city traffics.
     "Mr. Smith," said Mr.Terle, "lend a hand."
     They untied the huge case and hoisted it gingerly out between them.
     "What you got there?" cried Mr. Fremley from above.
     Mr. Smith stumbled. Miss Hillgood gasped. The case shifted in the two men's
arms.
     From within the case came a faint musical humming.
     Mr.  Fremley, above, heard. It was all the answer he needed. Mouth open, he
watched  the  lady and the two men and their boxed friend sway and vanish in the
cavernous porch below.
     "Watch  out!"  said  Mr. Smith. "Some damn fool left his luggage here -" He
stopped. "Some damn fool? Me/"
     The two men looked at each other. They were not perspiring any more. A wind
had  come  up  from somewhere, a gentle wind that fanned their shirt collars and
flapped the strewn calendar gently in the dust.
     "My luggage..." said Mr. Smith.
     Then, they all went inside.

     
     "More wine. Miss Hillgood? Ain't had wine on the table in years."
     "Just a touch, if you please."
     They  sat  by  the light of a single candle which made the room an oven and
struck fire from the good silverware and the uncracked plates as they talked and
drank warm wine and ate.
     "Miss Hillgood, get on with your life."
     "All  my life," she said, "I've been so busy running from Beethoven to Bach
to Brahms, I never noticed I was twenty-nine. Next time I looked up I was forty.
Yesterday,  seventy-one.  Oh, there were men; but they'd given up singing at ten
and given up flying when they were twelve. I always figured we were born to fly,
one way or other, so I couldn't stand most men shuffling along with all the iron
in  the  earth  in  their  blood.  I  never met a man who weighed less than nine
hundred  pounds. In their black business suits, you could hear them roll by like
funeral wagons."
     "So you flew away?"
     "Just  in  my  mind,  Mr.  Terle.  It's taken sixty years to make the final
break.  All  that  time  I grabbed on to piccolos and flutes and violins because
they make streams in the air, you know" like streams and rivers on the ground. I
rode  every  tributary and tried every fresh-water wind from Handel on down to a
whole slew of Strausses. It's been the far way around that's brought me here."
     "How'd you finally make up your mind to leave?" asked Mr. Smith.
     "I  looked around last week and said, 'Why, look, you've been flying alone!
No  one  in  all  Green  City  really  cares if you fly or how high you go. It's
always,  'Fine, Blanche,' or 'Thanks for the recital at the авР tea, Miss H.'
But  no one really listening. And when I talked a long time ago about Chicago or
New York, folks swatted me and laughed. 'Why be a little frog in a big pond when
you  can be the biggest frog in all Green City!' So I stayed on, while the folks
who  gave  me advice moved away or died or both. The rest had wax in their ears.
Just  last  week  I  shook  myself  and said, 'Hold on! Since when do frogs have
wings?'"
     "So now you're headin' west?" said Mr. Terle.
     "Maybe  to  play  in  pictures  or  in  that orchestra under the stars. But
somewhere I just must play at last for someone who'll hear and really listen..."
     They sat there in the warm dark. She was finished, she had said it all now,
foolish or not - and she moved back quietly in her chair.
     Upstairs someone coughed.
     Miss Hillgood heard, and rose.
     It took Mr. Fremley a moment to ungum his eyelids and make out the shape of
the woman bending down to place the tray by his rumpled bed.
     "What you all talking about down there just now?"
     "I'll come back later and tell you word for word," said Miss Hillgood. "Eat
now. The salad's fine." She moved to leave the room.
     He said, quickly, "You goin' to stay?"
     She  stopped  half out of the door and tried to trace the expression on his
sweating  face  in  the  dark. He, in turn, could not see her mouth or eyes. She
stood a moment longer, silently, then went on down the stairs.
     "She must not've heard me," said Mr. Fremley.
     But he knew she had heard.
     Miss  Hillgood crossed the downstairs lobby to fumble with the locks on the
upright leather case.
     "I must pay you for my supper."
     "On the house," said Mr. Terle.
     "I must pay," she said, and opened the case.
     There was a sudden flash of gold.
     The  two  men  quickened  in  their chairs. They squinted at the little old
woman standing beside the tremendous heart-shaped object which towered above her
with  its  shining  columbined  pedestal  atop  which  a  calm Grecian face with
antelope eyes looked serenely at them even as Miss Hillgood looked now.
     The  two  men shot each other the quickest and most startled of glances, as
if  each  had  guessed  what  might  happen next. They hurried across the lobby,
breathing  hard,  to sit on the very edge of the hot velvet lounge, wiping their
faces with damp handkerchiefs.
     Miss Hillgood drew a chair under her, rested the golden harp gently back on
her shoulder, and put her hands to the strings.
     Mr. Terle took a breath of fiery air and waited.
     A  desert wind came suddenly along the porch outside, tilting the chairs so
they rocked this way and that like boats on a pond at night.
     Mr. Fremley's voice protested from above. "What's goin' on down there?"
     And then Miss Hillgood moved her hands.
     Starting  at  the  arch near her shoulder, she played her fingers out along
the  simple tapestry of wires towards the blind and beautiful stare of the Greek
goddess on her column, and then back. Then, for a moment, she paused and let the
sounds drift up through the baked lobby air and into all the empty rooms.
     If  Mr.  Fremley  shouted, above, no one heard. For Mr. Terle and Mr. Smith
were  so  busy jumping up to stand riven in the shadows, they heard nothing save
the  storming  of  their own hearts and the shocked rush of all the air in their
lungs. Eyes wide, mouths dropped, in a kind of pure insanity, they stared at the
two  women there, the blind Muse proud on her golden pillar, and the seated one,
gentle eyes closed, her small hands stretched forth on the air.
     Like a girl, they both thought wildly, like a little girl putting her hands
out of a window to feel what? Why, of course, of course!
     To feel the rain.
     The   echo   of  the  first  shower  vanished  down  remote  causeways  and
roof-drains, away.
     Mr. Fremley, above, rose from his bed as if pulled round by his cars.
     Miss Hillgood played.
     She  played  and  it wasn't a tune they knew at all, but it was a tune they
had heard a thousand times in their long lives, words or not, melody or not. She
played and each time her fingers moved, the rain fell pattering through the dark
hotel. The rain fell cool at the open windows and the rain rinsed down the baked
floorboards of the porch. The rain fell on the rooftop and fell on hissing sand,
it  fell  on  rusted car and empty stable and dead cactus in the yard. It washed
the  windows  and  laid  the  dust and filled the rain-barrels and curtained the
doors with beaded threads that might part and whisper as you walked through. But
more  than anything, the soft touch and coolness of it fell on Mr. Smith and Mr.
Terle.  Its  gentle  weight  and  pressure moved them down and down until it had
seated  them  again.  By its continuous budding and prickling on their faces, it
made them shut up their eyes and mouths and raise their hands to shield it away.
Seated  there, they felt their heads tilt slowly back to let the rain fall where
it would.
     The  flash  flood  lasted  a minute, then faded away as the fingers trailed
down the loom, let drop a few last bursts and squalls and then stopped.
     The  last chord hung in the air like a picture taken when lightning strikes
and  freezes  a  billion  drops  of  water  on  their  downward flight. Then the
lightning went out. The last drops fell through darkness in silence.
     Miss Hillgood took her hands from the strings, her eyes still shut.
     Mr.  Terle  and  Mr.  Smith  opened  their eyes to see those two miraculous
women, way over there across the lobby, somehow come through the storm untouched
and dry.
     They  trembled. They leaned forward as if they wished to speak. They looked
helpless, not knowing what to do.
     And  then  a single sound from high above in the hotel corridors drew their
attention and told them what to do.
     The  sound  came floating down feebly, fluttering like a tired bird beating
its ancient wings.
     The two men looked up and listened.
     It was the sound of Mr. Premley.
     Mr. Premley, in his room, applauding.
     It  took  five  seconds  for  Mr.  Terle to figure out what it was. Then he
nudged  Mr. Smith and began, himself, to beat his palms together. вых two men
struck  their  hands in mighty explosions. The echoes ricocheted around about in
the  hotel  caverns above and below, striking walls, mirrors, windows, trying to
fight free of the rooms.
     Miss  Hillgood opened her eyes now, as if this new storm had come on her in
the open, unprepared.
     The  men  gave  their  own  recital.  They  smashed their hands together so
fervently  it  seemed  they  had  fistfuls  of  firecrackers  to set off, one on
another.  Mr. Fremley shouted. Nobody heard. Hands winged out, banged shut again
and  again  until fingers puffed up and the old men's breath came short and they
put their hands at last on their knees, a heart pounding inside each one.
     Then,  very  slowly,  Mr.  Smith got up and still looking at the harp, went
outside  and  carried in the suitcases. He stood at the foot of the lobby stairs
looking  for  a long while at Miss Hillgood. He glanced down at her single piece
of  luggage resting there by the first tread. He looked from her suitcase to her
and raised his eyebrows, questioningly.
     Miss  Hillgood  looked  at  her harp, at her suitcase, at Mr. Terle, and at
last back to Mr. Smith.
     She nodded once.
     Mr. Smith bent down and with his own luggage under one arm and her suitcase
in  the  other, he started the long slow climb up the stairs in the gentle dark.
As  he  moved, Miss Hillgood put the harp back on her shoulder and either played
in  time  to his moving or he moved in time to her playing, neither of them knew
which.
     Half  up  the  flight,  Mr. Smith met Mr. Fremley who, in a faded robe, was
testing his slow way down.
     Both  stood  there,  looking  deep into the lobby at the one man on the far
side in the shadows, and the two women farther over, no more than a motion and a
gleam. Both thought the same thoughts.
     The  sound  of  the harp playing, the sound of the cool water falling every
night  and every night of their lives, after this. No spraying the roof with the
garden  hose  now,  any more. Only sit on the porch or lie in your night bed and
hear the falling... the falling... the falling....
     Mr. Smith moved on up the stair; Mr. Fremley moved down.
     The harp, the harp. Listen, listen!
     The fifty years of drought were over.
     The time of the long rains had come.