[Proofed to line 1994]

Pale Fire 
by Vladimir Nabokov


To Vera


	This reminds me of the ludicrous account he gave Mr. Langton, of the despicable state of a young gentleman of good family. "Sir, when I heard of him last, he was running about town shooting cats." And then in a sort of kindly reverie, he bethought himself of his own favorite cat, and said, "But Hodge shan't be shot: no, no, Hodge shall not be shot."

	--JAMES BOSWELL, the Life of Samuel Johnson



Foreword

Pale Fire, a poem in heroic couplets, of nine hundred ninety-nine lines, divided into four cantos, was composed by John Francis Shade (born July 5, 1898, died July 21, 1959) during the last twenty days of his life, at his residence in New Wye, Appalachia, U.S.A. The manuscript, mostly a Fair Copy, from which the present text has been faithfully printed, consists of eighty medium-sized index cards, on each of which Shade reserved the pink upper line for headings (canto number, date) and used the fourteen light-blue lines for writing out with a fine nib in a minute, tidy, remarkably clear hand, the text of his poem, skipping a line to indicate double space, and always using a fresh card to begin a new canto.
	The short (166 lines) Canto One, with all those amusing birds and parhelia, occupies thirteen cards. Canto Two, your favorite, and that shocking tour de force, Canto Three, are identical in length (334 lines) and cover twenty-seven cards each. Canto Four reverts to One in length and occupies again thirteen cards, of which the last four used on the day of his death give a Corrected Draft instead of a Fair Copy.
	A methodical man, John Shade usually copied out his daily quota of completed lines at midnight but even if he recopied them again later, as I suspect he sometimes did, he marked his card or cards not with the date of his final adjustments, but with that of his Corrected Draft or first Fair Copy. I mean, he preserved the date of actual creation rather than that of second or third thoughts. There is a very loud amusement park right in front of my present lodgings.
	We possess in result a complete calendar of his work. Canto One was begun in the small hours of July 2 and completed on July 4. He started the next canto on his birthday and finished it on July 11. Another week was devoted to Canto Three. Canto Four was begun on July 19, and as already noted, the last third of its text (lines 949-999) is supplied by a Corrected Draft. This is extremely rough in appearance, teeming with devastating erasures and cataclysmic insertions, and does not follow the lines of the card as rigidly as the Fair Copy does. Actually, it turns out to be beautifully accurate when you once make the plunge and compel yourself to open your eyes in the limpid depths under its confused surface. It contains not one gappy line, not one doubtful reading. This fact would be sufficient to show that the imputations made (on July 24, 1959) in a newspaper interview with one of our professed Shadeans - who affirmed without having seen the manuscript of the poem that it "consists of disjointed drafts none of which yields a definite text" - is a malicious invention on the part of those who would wish not so much to deplore the state in which a great poet's work was interrupted by death as to asperse the competence, and perhaps honesty, of its present editor and commentator.
	Another pronouncement publicly made by Prof. Hurley and his clique refers to a structural matter. I quote from the same interview: "None can say how long John Shade planned his poem to be, but it is not improbable that what he left represents only a small fraction of the composition he saw in a glass, darkly." Nonsense again! Aside from the veritable clarion of internal evidence ringing throughout Canto Four, there exists Sybil Shade's affirmation (in a document dated July 25, 1959) that her husband "never intended to go beyond four parts." For him the third canto was the penultimate one, and thus I myself have heard him speak of it, in the course of a sunset ramble, when, as if thinking aloud, he reviewed the day's work and gesticulated in pardonable self-approbation while his discreet companion kept trying in vain to adapt the swing of a long-limbed gait to the disheveled old poet's jerky shuffle. Nay, I shall even assert (as our shadows still walk without us) that there remained to be written only one line of the poem (namely verse 1000) which would have been identical to line 1 and would have completed the symmetry of the structure, with its two identical central parts, solid and ample, forming together with the shorter flanks twin wings of five hundred verses each, and damn that music. Knowing Shade's combinational turn of mind and subtle sense of harmonic balance, I cannot imagine that he intended to deform the faces of his crystal by meddling with its predictable growth. And if all this were not enough - and it is, it is enough - I have had the dramatic occasion of hearing my poor friend's own voice proclaim on the evening of July 21 the end, or almost the end, of his labors. (See my note to line 991.)
	This batch of eighty cards was held by a rubber band which I now religiously put back after examining for the last time their precious contents. Another, much thinner, set of a dozen cards, clipped together and enclosed in the same manila envelope as the main batch, bears some additional couplets running their brief and sometimes smudgy course among a chaos of first drafts. As a rule, Shade destroyed drafts the moment he ceased to need them: well do I recall seeing him from my porch, on a brilliant morning, burning a whole stack of them in the pale fire of the incinerator before which he stood with bent head like an official mourner among the wind-borne black butterflies of that backyard auto-da-fé. But he saved those twelve cards because of the unused felicities shining among the dross of used draftings. Perhaps, he vaguely expected to replace certain passages in the Fair Copy with some of the lovely rejections in his files, or, more probably, a sneaking fondness for this or that vignette, suppressed out of architectonic considerations, or because it had annoyed Mrs. S., urged him to put off its disposal till the time when the marble finality of an immaculate typescript would have confirmed it or made the most delightful variant seem cumbersome and impure. And perhaps, let me add in all modesty, he intended to ask my advice after reading his poem to me as I know he planned to do.
	In my notes to the poem the reader will find these canceled readings. Their places are indicated, or at least suggested, by the draftings of established lines in their immediate neighborhood. In a sense, many of them are more valuable artistically and historically than some of the best passages in the final text. I must now explain how Pale Fire came to be edited by me.
	Immediately after my dear friend's death I prevailed on his distraught widow to forelay and defeat the commercial passions and academic intrigues that were bound to come swirling around her husband's manuscript (transferred by me to a safe spot even before his body had reached the grave) by signing an agreement to the effect that he had turned over the manuscript to me; that I would have it published, without delay, with my commentary by a firm of my choice; that all profits, except the publisher's percentage, would accrue to her; and that on publication day the manuscript would be handed over to the Library of Congress for permanent preservation. I defy any serious critic to find this contract unfair. Nevertheless, it has been called (by Shade's former lawyer) "a fantastic farrago of evil," while another person (his former literary agent) has wondered with a sneer if Mrs. Shade's tremulous signature might not have been penned "in some peculiar kind of red ink." Such hearts, such brains, would be unable to comprehend that one's attachment to a masterpiece may be utterly overwhelming, especially when it is the underside of the weave that entrances the beholder and only begetter, whose own past intercoils there with the fate of the innocent author.
	As mentioned, I think, in my last note to the poem, the depth charge of Shade's death blasted such secrets and caused so many dead fish to float up, that I was forced to leave New Wye soon after my last interview with the jailed killer. The writing of the commentary had to be postponed until I could find a new incognito in quieter surroundings, but practical matters concerning the poem had to be settled at once. I took a plane to New York, had the manuscript photographed, came to terms with one of Shade's publishers, and was on the point of clinching the deal when, quite casually, in the midst of a vast sunset (we sat in a cell of walnut and glass fifty stories above the progression of scarabs), my interlocutor observed: "You'll be happy to know, Dr. Kinbote, that Professor So-and-so [one of the members of the Shade committee] has consented to act as our adviser in editing the stuff."
	Now "happy" is something extremely subjective. One of our sillier Zemblan proverbs says: the lost glove is happy. Promptly I refastened the catch of my briefcase and betook myself to another publisher.
	Imagine a soft, clumsy giant; imagine a historical personage whose knowledge of money is limited to the abstract billions of a national debt; imagine an exiled prince who is unaware of the Golconda in his cuff links! This is to say - oh, hyperbolically - that I am the most impractical fellow in the world. Between such a person and an old fox in the book publishing business, relations are at first touchingly carefree and chummy, with expansive banterings and all sorts of amiable tokens. I have no reason to suppose that anything will ever happen to prevent this initial relationship with good old Frank, my present publisher, from remaining a permanent fixture.
	Frank has acknowledged the safe return of the galleys I had been sent here and has asked me to mention in my Preface - and this I willingly do - that I alone am responsible for any mistakes in my commentary. Insert before a professional. A professional proofreader has carefully rechecked the printed text of the poem against the phototype of the manuscript, and has found a few trivial misprints I had missed; that has been all in the way of outside assistance. Needless to say how much I had been looking forward to Sybil Shade's providing me with abundant biographical data; unfortunately she left New Wye even before I did, and is dwelling now with relatives in Quebec. We might have had, of course, a most fruitful correspondence, but the Shadeans were not to be shaken off. They headed for Canada in droves to pounce on the poor lady as soon as I had lost contact with her and her changeful moods. Instead of answering a month-old letter from my cave in Cedarn, listing some of my most desperate queries, such as the real name of "Jim Coates" etc., she suddenly shot me a wire, requesting me to accept Prof. H. (!) and Prof. C (!!) as coeditors of her husband's poem. How deeply this surprised and pained me! Naturally, it precluded collaboration with my friend's misguided widow.
	And he was a very dear friend indeed! The calendar says I had known him only for a few months but there exist friendships which develop their own inner duration, their own eons of transparent time, independent of rotating, malicious music. Never shall I forget how elated I was upon learning, as mentioned in a note my reader shall find; that the suburban house (rented for my use from Judge Goldsworth who had gone on his Sabbatical to England) into which I moved on February 5, 1959, stood next to that of the celebrated American poet whose verses I had tried to put into Zemblan two decades earlier! Apart from this glamorous neighborhood, the Goldsworthian château, as I was soon to discover, had little to recommend it. The heating system was a farce, depending as it did on registers in the floor wherefrom the tepid exhalations of a throbbing and groaning basement furnace were transmitted to the rooms with the faintness of a moribund's last breath. By occluding the apertures upstairs I attempted to give more energy to the register in the living room but its climate proved to be incurably vitiated by there being nothing between it and the arctic regions save a sleezy front door without a vestige of vestibule - either because the house had been built in midsummer by a naïve settler who could not imagine the kind of winter New Wye had in store for him, or because old-time gentility required that a chance caller at the open door could satisfy himself from the threshold that nothing unseemly was going on in the parlor.
	February and March in Zembla (the two last of the four "white-nosed months," as we call them) used to be pretty rough too, but even a peasant's room there presented a solid of uniform warmth - not a reticulation of deadly drafts. It is true that, as usually happens to newcomers, I was told I had chosen the worst winter in years - and this at the latitude of Palermo. On one of my first mornings there, as I was preparing to leave for college in the powerful red car I had just acquired, I noticed that Mr. and Mrs. Shade, neither of whom I had yet met socially (I was to learn later that they assumed I wished to be left alone), were having trouble with their old Packard in the slippery driveway where it emitted whines of agony but could not extricate one tortured rear wheel out of a concave inferno of ice. John Shade busied himself clumsily with a bucket from which, with the gestures of a sower, he distributed handfuls of brown sand over the blue glaze. He wore snowboots, his vicuña collar was up, his abundant gray hair looked berimed in the sun. I knew he had been ill a few months before, and thinking to offer my neighbors a ride to the campus in my powerful machine, I hurried out toward them. A lane curving around the slight eminence on which my rented castle stood separated it from my neighbors' driveway, and I was about to cross that lane when I lost my footing and sat down on the surprisingly hard snow. My fall acted as a chemical reagent on the Shades' sedan, which forthwith budged and almost ran over me as it swung into the lane with John at the wheel strenuously grimacing and Sybil fiercely talking to him. I am not sure either saw me.
	A few days later, however, namely on Monday, February 16, I was introduced to the old poet at lunch time in the faculty club. "At last presented credentials," as noted, a little ironically, in my agenda. I was invited to join him and four or five other eminent professors at his usual table, under an enlarged photograph of Wordsmith College as it was, stunned and shabby, on a remarkably gloomy summer day in 1903. His laconic suggestion that I "try the pork" amused me. I am a strict vegetarian, and I like to cook my own meals. Consuming something that had been handled by a fellow creature was, I explained to the rubicund convives, as repulsive to me as eating any creature, and that would include - lowering my voice - the pulpous pony-tailed girl student who served us and licked her pencil. Moreover, I had already finished the fruit brought with me in my briefcase, so I would content myself, I said, with a bottle of good college ale. My free and simple demeanor set everybody at ease. The usual questionsmere fired at me about eggnogs and milkshakes being or not being acceptable to one of my persuasion. Shade said that with him it was the other way around: he must make a definite effort to partake of a vegetable. Beginning a salad, was to him like stepping into sea water on a chilly day, and he had always to brace himself in order to attack the fortress of an apple. I was not yet used to the rather fatiguing jesting and teasing that goes on among American intellectuals of the inbreeding academic type and so abstained from telling John Shade in front of all those grinning old males how much I admired his work lest a serious discussion of literature degenerate into mere facetiation. Instead I asked him about one of my newly acquired students who also attended his course, a moody, delicate, rather wonderful boy; but with a resolute shake of his hoary forelock the old poet answered that he had ceased long ago to memorize faces and names of students and that the only person in his poetry class whom he could visualize was an extramural lady on crutches. "Come, come," said Professor Hufey, "do you mean, John, you really don't have a mental or visceral picture of that stunning blonde in the black leotard who haunts Lit. 202?" Shade, all his wrinkles beaming, benignly tapped Hurley on the wrist to make him stop. Another tormentor inquired if it was true that I had installed two ping-pong tables in my basement. I asked, was it a crime? No, he said, but why two? "Is that a crime?" I countered, and they all laughed.
	Despite a wobbly heart (see line 735), a slight limp, and a certain curious contortion in his method of progress, Shade had an inordinate liking for long walks, but the snow bothered him, and he preferred, in winter, to have his wife call for him after classes with the car. A few days later, as I was about to leave Parthenocissus Hall - or Main Hall (or now Shade Hall, alas), I saw him waiting outside for Mrs. Shade to fetch him. I stood beside him for a minute, on the steps of the pillared porch, while pulling my gloves on, finger by finger, and looking away, as if waiting to review a regiment: "That was a thorough job," commented the poet. He consulted his wrist watch. A snowflake settled upon it. "Crystal to crystal," said Shade. I offered to take him home in my powerful Kramler. "Wives, Mr. Shade, are forgetful." He cocked his shaggy head to look at the library clock. Across the bleak expanse of snow-covered turf two radiant lads in colorful winter clothes passed, laughing and sliding. Shade glanced at his watch again and, with a shrug, accepted my offer.
	I wanted to know if he did not mind being taken the longer way, with a stop at Community Center where I wanted to buy some chocolate-coated cookies and a little caviar. He said it was fine with him. From the inside of the supermarket, through a plate-glass window, I saw the old chap pop into a liquor store. When I returned with my purchases, he was back in the car, reading a tabloid newspaper which I had thought no poet would deign to touch. A comfortable burp told me he had a flask of brandy concealed about his warmly coated person. As we turned into the driveway of his house, we saw Sybil pulling up in front of it. I got out with courteous vivacity. She said: "Since my husband does not believe in introducing people, let us do it ourselves: You are Dr. Kinbote, aren't you? And. I am Sybil Shade." Then she addressed her husband saying he might have waited in his office another minute: she had honked and called, and walked all the way up, et cetera. I turned to go, not wishing to listen to a marital scene, but she called me back: "Have a drink with us," she said, "or rather with me, because John is forbidden to touch alcohol." I explained I could not stay long as I was about to have a kind of little seminar at home followed by some table tennis, with two charming identical twins and another boy, another boy.
	Henceforth I began seeing more and more of my celebrated neighbor. The view from one of my windows kept providing me with first-rate entertainment, especially when I was on the wait for some tardy guest. From the second story of my house the Shades' living-room window remained clearly visible so long as the branches of the deciduous trees between us were still bare, and almost every evening I could see the poet's slippered foot gently rocking. One inferred from it that he was sitting with a book in a low chair but one never managed to glimpse more than that foot and its shadow moving up and down to the secret rhythm of mental absorption, in the concentrated lamplight. Always at the same time the brown morocco slipper would drop from the wool-socked foot which continued to oscillate, with, however, a slight slackening of pace. One knew that bedtime was closing in with all its terrors; that in a few minutes the toe would prod and worry the slipper, and then disappear with it from my golden field of vision traversed by the black bendlet of a branch. And sometimes Sybil Shade would trip by with the velocity and swinging arms of one flouncing out in a fit of temper, and would return a little later, at a much slower gait, having, as it were, pardoned her husband for his friendship with an eccentric neighbor; but the riddle of her behavior was entirely solved one night when by dialing their number and watching their window at the same time I magically induced her to go through the hasty and quite innocent motions that had puzzled me.
	Alas, my peace of mind was soon to be shattered. The thick venom of envy began squirting at me as soon as academic suburbia realized that John Shade valued my society above that of all other people. Your snicker, my dear Mrs. C., did not escape our notice as I was helping the tired old poet to find his galoshes after that dreary get-together party at your house. One day I happened to enter the English Literature office in quest of a magazine with the picture of the Royal Palace in Onhava, which I wanted my friend to see, when I overheard a young instructor in a green velvet jacket, whom I shall mercifully call Gerald Emerald, carelessly saying in answer to something the secretary had asked: "I guess Mr. Shade has already left with the Great Beaver." Of course I am quite tall, and my brown beard is of a rather rich tint and texture; the silly cognomen evidently applied to me, but was not worth noticing, and after calmly taking the magazine from a pamphlet-cluttered table, I contented myself on my way out with pulling Gerald Emerald's bow-tie loose with a deft jerk of my fingers as I passed by him. There was also the morning when Dr. Nattochdag, head of the department to which I was attached, begged me in a formal voice to be seated, then closed the door, and having regained, with a downcast frown, his swivel chair, urged me "to be more careful." In what sense, careful? A boy had complained to his adviser. Complained of what, good Lord? That I had criticized a literature course he attended ("a ridiculous survey of ridiculous works, conducted by a ridiculous mediocrity"). Laughing in sheer relief, I embraced my good Netochka, telling him I would never be naughty again. I take this opportunity to salute him. He always behaved with such exquisite courtesy toward me that I sometimes wondered if he did not suspect what Shade suspected, and what only three people (two trustees and the president of the college) definitely knew.
	Oh, there were many such incidents. In a skit performed by a group of drama students I was pictured as a pompous woman hater with a German accent, constantly quoting Housman and nibbling raw carrots; and a week before Shade's death, a certain ferocious lady at whose club I had refused to speak on the subject of "The Hally Vally" (as she put it, confusing Odin's Hall with the title of a Finnish epic), said to me in the middle of a grocery store, "You are a remarkably disagreeable person. I fail to see how John and Sybil can stand you," and, exasperated by my polite smile, she added: "What's more, you are insane." But let me not pursue the tabulation of nonsense. Whatever was thought, whatever was said, I had my full reward in John's friendship. This friendship was the more precious for its tenderness being intentionally concealed, especially when we were not alone, by that gruffness which stems from what can be termed the dignity of the heart. His whole being constituted a mask. John Shade's physical appearance was so little in keeping with the harmonies hiving in the man, that one felt inclined to dismiss it as a coarse disguise or passing fashion; for if the fashions of the Romantic Age subtilized a poet's manliness by baring his attractive neck, pruning his profile and reflecting a mountain lake in his oval gaze, present-day bards, owing perhaps to better opportunities of aging, look like gorillas or vultures. My sublime neighbor's face had something about it that might have appealed to the eye, had it been only leonine or only Iroquoian; but unfortunately, by combining the two it merely reminded one of a fleshy Hogarthian tippler of indeterminate sex. His misshapen body, that gray mop of abundant hair, the yellow nails of his pudgy fingers, the bags under his lusterless eyes, were only intelligible if regarded as the waste products eliminated from his intrinsic self by the same forces of perfection which purifed and chiseled his verse. He was his own cancellation.
	I have one favorite photograph of him. In this color snapshot taken by a onetime friend of mine, on a brilliant spring day, Shade is seen leaning on a sturdy cane that had belonged to his aunt Maud (see line 86). I am wearing a white windbreaker acquired in a local sports shop and a pair of lilac slacks hailing from Cannes. My left hand is half raised - not to pat Shade on the shoulder as seems to be the intention, but to remove my sunglasses which, however, it never reached in that life, the life of the picture; and the library book under my right arm is a treatise on certain Zemblan calisthenics in which I proposed to interest that young roomer of mine who snapped the picture. A week later he was to betray my trust by taking sordid advantage of my absence on a trip to Washington whence I returned to find he had been entertaining a fiery-haired whore from Exton who had left her combings and reek in all three bathrooms. Naturally we separated at once, and through a chink in the window curtains I saw bad Bob standing rather pathetically, with his crewcut, and shabby valise, and the skis I had given him, all forlorn on the roadside, waiting for a fellow student to drive him away forever. I can forgive everything save treason.
	We never discussed, John Shade and I, any of my personal misfortunes. Our close friendship was on that higher, exclusively intellectual level where one can rest from emotional troubles, not share them. My admiration for him was for me a sort of alpine cure. I experienced a grand sense of wonder whenever I looked at him, especially in the presence of other people, inferior people. This wonder was enhanced by my awareness of their not feeling what I felt, of their not seeing what I saw, of their taking Shade for granted, instead of drenching every nerve, so to speak, in the romance of his presence. Here he is, I would say to myself, that is his head, containing a brain of a different brand than that of the synthetic jellies preserved in the skulls around him. He is looking from the terrace (of Prof. C.'s house on that March evening) at the distant lake. I am looking at him, I am witnessing a unique physiological phenomenon: John Shade perceiving and transforming the world, taking it in and taking it apart, re-combining its elements in the very process of storing them up so as to produce at some unspecified date an organic miracle, a fusion of image and music, a line of verse. And I experienced the same thrill as when in my early boyhood I once watched across the tea table in my uncle's castle a conjurer who had just given a fantastic performance and was now quietly consuming a vanilla ice. I stared at his powdered cheeks, at the magical flower in his buttonhole where it had passed through a succession of different colors and had now become fixed as a white carnation, and especially at his marvelous fluid-looking fingers which could if he chose make his spoon dissolve into a sunbeam by twiddling it, or turn his plate into a dove by tossing it up in the air.
	Shade's poem is, indeed, that sudden flourish of magic: my gray-haired friend, my beloved old conjurer, put a pack of index cards into his hat - and shook out a poem.
	To this poem we now must turn. My Foreword has been, I trust, not too skimpy. Other notes, arranged in a running commentary, will certainly satisfy the most voracious reader. Although those notes, in conformity with custom, come after the poem, the reader is advised to consult them first and then study the poem with their help, rereading them of course as he goes through its text, and perhaps, after having done with the poem, consulting them a third time so as to complete the picture. I find it wise in such cases as this to eliminate the bother of back-and-forth leafings by either cutting out and clipping together the pages with the text of the thing, or, even more simply, purchasing two copies of the same work which can then be placed in adjacent positions on a comfortable table - not like the shaky little affair on which my typewriter is precariously enthroned now, in this wretched motor lodge, with that carrousel inside and outside my head, miles away from New Wye. Let me state that without my notes Shade's text simply has no human reality at all since the human reality of such a poem as his (being too skittish and reticent for an autobiographical work), with the omission of many pithy lines carelessly rejected by him, has to depend entirely on the reality of its author and his surroundings, attachments and so forth, a reality that only my notes can provide. To this statement my dear poet would probably not have subscribed, but, for better or worse, it is the commentator who has the last word.

	CHARLES KINBOTE Oct. 19, 1959, Cedarn, Utana




PALE FIRE

A Poem in Four Cantos


Canto One


1	I was the shadow of the waxwing slain
	By the false azure in the windowpane;
	I was the smudge of ashen fluff - and I
	Lived on, flew on, in the reflected sky.
	And from the inside, too, I'd duplicate
	Myself, my lamp, an apple on a plate: 
	Uncurtaining the night, I'd let dark glass 
	Hang all the furniture above the grass, 
	And how delightful when a fall of snow 
10	Covered my glimpse of lawn and reached up so 
	As to make chair and bed exactly stand 
	Upon that snow, out in that crystal land!
	
	Retake the falling snow: each drifting flake
	Shapeless and slow, unsteady and opaque,
	A dull dark white against the day's pale white
	And abstract larches in the neutral light.
	And then the gradual and dual blue
	As night unites the viewer and the view,
	And in the morning, diamonds of frost
20	Express amazement: Whose spurred feet have crossed
	From left to right the blank page of the road?
	Reading from left to right in winter's code: 
	A dot, an arrow pointing back; repeat: 
	Dot, arrow pointing back... A pheasant's feet 
	Torquated beauty, sublimated grouse, 
	Finding your China right behind my house.
	Was he in Sherlock Holmes, the fellow whose
	Tracks pointed back when he reversed his shoes?
	
	All colors made me happy: even gray.
30	My eyes were such that literally they
	Took photographs. Whenever I'd permit, 
	Or, with a silent shiver, order it, 
	Whatever in my field of vision dwelt -
	An indoor scene, hickory leaves, the svelte 
	Stilettos of a frozen stillicide - 
	Was printed on my eyelids' nether side 
	Where it would tarry for an hour or two, 
	And while this lasted all I had to do 
	Was close my eyes to reproduce the leaves, 
40	Or indoor scene, or trophies of the eaves.
	
	I cannot understand why from the lake
	I could make out our front porch when I'd take
	Lake Road to school, whilst now, although no tree
	Has intervened, I look but fail to see
	Even the roof. Maybe some quirk in space
	Has caused a fold or furrow to displace 
	The fragile vista, the frame house between 
	Goldsworth and Wordsmith on its square of green.
	
	I had a favorite young shagbark there 
50	With ample dark jade leaves and a black, spare, 
	Vermiculated trunk. The setting sun 
	Bronzed the black bark, around which, like undone 
	Garlands, the shadows of the foliage fell. 
	It is now stout and rough; it has done well. 
	White butterflies turn lavender as they 
	Pass through its shade where gently seems to sway 
	The phantom of my little daughter's swing.
	
	The house itself is much the same. One wing 
	We've had revamped. There's a solarium. There's 
60	A picture window flanked with fancy chairs. 
	TV's huge paperclip now shines instead 
	Of the stiff vane so often visited 
	By the naïve, the gauzy mockingbird 
	Retelling all the programs she had heard; 
	Switching from chippo-chippo to a clear 
	To-wee, to-wee; then rasping out: come here, 
	Come here, come herrr'; flirting her tail aloft, 
	Or gracefully indulging in a soft 
	Upward hop-flop, and instantly (to-wee!) 
70	Returning to her perch - the new TV.
	
	I was an infant when my parents died. 
	They both were ornithologists. I've tried 
	So often to evoke them that today 
	I have a thousand parents. Sadly they 
	Dissolve in their own virtues and recede, 
	But certain words, chance words I hear or read, 
	Such as "bad heart" always to him refer, 
	And "cancer of the pancreas" to her.
	
	A preterist: one who collects cold nests.
80	Here was my bedroom, now reserved for guests. 
	Here, tucked away by the Canadian maid, 
	I listened to the buzz downstairs and prayed 
	For everybody to be always well, 
	Uncles and aunts, the maid, her niece Adéle 
	Who'd seen the Pope, people in books, and God.
	
	I was brought up by dear bizarre Aunt Maud, 
	A poet and a painter with a taste 
	For realistic objects interlaced 
	With grotesque growths and images of doom.
90	She lived to hear the next babe cry. Her room 
	We've kept intact. Its trivia create 
	A still life in her style: the paperweight 
	Of convex glass enclosing a lagoon, 
	The verse book open at the Index (Moon, 
	Moonrise, Moor, Moral), the forlorn guitar, 
	The human skull; and from the local Star 
	A curio: Red Sox Beat Yanks 5-4 
	On Chapman's Homer, thumbtacked to the door.
	
	My God died young. Theolatry I found 
100	Degrading, and its premises, unsound. 
	No free man needs a God; but was I free? 
	How fully I felt nature glued to me 
	And how my childish palate loved the taste 
	Half-fish, half-honey, of that golden paste! 
	My picture book was at an early age 
	The painted parchment papering our cage: 
	Mauve rings around the moon; blood-orange sun 
	Twinned Iris; and that rare phenomenon 
	The iridule - when, beautiful and strange, 
110	In a bright sky above a mountain range 
	One opal cloudlet in an oval form 
	Reflects the rainbow of a thunderstorm 
	Which in a distant valley has been staged - 
	For we are most artistically caged.
	
	And there's the wall of sound: the nightly wall 
	Raised by a trillion crickets in the fall. 
	Impenetrable! Halfway up the hill 
	I'd pause in thrall of their delirious trill. 
	That's Dr. Sutton's light. That's the Great Bear.
120	A thousand years ago five minutes were 
	Equal to forty ounces of fine sand. 
	Outstare the stars. Infinite foretime and 
	Infinite aftertime: above your head 
	They close like giant wings, and you are dead.
	
	The regular vulgarian, I daresay, 
	Is happier: he sees the Milky Way 
	Only when making water. Then as now 
	I walked at my own risk: whipped by the bough, 
	Tripped by the stump. Asthmatic, lame and fat, 
130	I never bounced a ball or swung a bat.
	
	I was the shadow of the waxwing slain
	By feigned remoteness in the windowpane. 
	I had a brain, five senses (one unique); 
	But otherwise I was a cloutish freak. 
	In sleeping dreams I played with other chaps 
	But really envied nothing - save perhaps 
	The miracle of a lemniscate left 
	Upon wet sand by nonchalantly deft 
	Bicycle tires. 
	
					A thread of subtle pain, 
140	Tugged at by playful death, released again, 
	But always present, ran through me. One day, 
	When I'd just turned eleven, as I lay 
	Prone on the floor and watched a clockwork toy - 
	A tin wheelbarrow pushed by a tin boy - 
	Bypass chair legs and stray beneath the bed, 
	There was a sudden sunburst in my head.
	
	And then black night. That blackness was sublime.
	I felt distributed through space and time: 
	One foot upon a mountaintop, one hand 
150	Under the pebbles of a panting strand, 
	One ear in Italy, one eye in Spain, 
	In caves, my blood, and in the stars, my brain. 
	There were dull throbs in my Triassic; green 
	Optical spots in Upper Pleistocene, 
	An icy shiver down my Age of Stone, 
	And all tomorrows in my funnybone.
	
	During one winter every afternoon 
	I'd sink into that momentary swoon. 
	And then it ceased. Its memory grew dim.
160 My health improved. I even learned to swim. 
	But like some little lad forced by a wench 
	With his pure tongue her abject thirst to quench, 
	I was corrupted, terrified, allured, 
	And though old doctor Colt pronounced me cured 
	Of what, he said, were mainly growing pains, 
	The wonder lingers and the shame remains.




Canto Two


	There was a time in my demented youth 
	When somehow I suspected that the truth 
	About survival after death was known - 
170	To every human being: I alone 
	Knew nothing, and a great conspiracy 
	Of books and people hid the truth from me.
	There was the day when I began to doubt
	Man's sanity: How could he live without
	Knowing for sure what dawn, what death, what doom
	Awaited consciousness beyond the tomb?
	
	And finally there was the sleepless night 
	When I decided to explore and fight 
	The foul, the inadmissible abyss, 
180	Devoting all my twisted life to this One task. 
	Today I'm sixty-one. Waxwings 
	Are berry-pecking. A cicada sings.
	
	The little scissors I am holding are 
	A dazzling synthesis of sun and star. 
	I stand before the window and I pare 
	My fingernails and vaguely am aware 
	Of certain flinching likenesses: the thumb, 
	Our grocer's son; the index, lean and glum 
	College astronomer Starover Blue; 
190	The middle fellow, a tall priest I knew; 
	The feminine fourth finger, an old flirt; 
	And little pinky clinging to her skirt. 
	And I make mouths as I snip off the thin 
	Strips of what Aunt Maud used to call "scarf-skin."
	
	Maud Shade was eighty when a sudden hush 
	Fell on her life. We saw the angry flush 
	And torsion of paralysis assail 
	Her noble cheek. We moved her to Pinedale, 
	Famed for its sanitarium. There she'd sit 
200	In the glassed sun and watch the fly that lit 
	Upon her dress and then upon her wrist. 
	Her mind kept fading in the growing mist. 
	She still could speak. She paused, and groped, and found 
	What seemed at first a serviceable sound, 
	But from adjacent cells impostors took 
	The place of words she needed, and her look 
	Spelt imploration as she sought in vain 
	To reason with the monsters in her brain.
	
	What moment in the gradual decay 
210	Does resurrection choose? What years? What day? 
	Who has the stopwatch? Who rewinds the tape? 
	Are some less lucky, or do all escape? 
	A syllogism: other men die; but I 
	Am not another; therefore I'll not die. 
	Space is a swarming in the eyes; and time, 
	A singing in the ears. In this hive I'm 
	Locked up. Yet, if prior to life we had 
	Been able to imagine life, what mad, 
	Impossible, unutterably weird, 
220	Wonderful nonsense it might have appeared!
	
	So why join in the vulgar laughter? Why 
	Scorn a hereafter none can verify: 
	The Turk's delight, the future lyres, the talks 
	With Socrates and Proust in cypress walks, 
	The seraph with his six flamingo wings, 
	And Flemish hells with porcupines and things? 
	It isn't that we dream too wild a dream: 
	The trouble is we do not make it seem 
	Sufficiently unlikely; for the most 
230	We can think up is a domestic ghost.
	
	How ludicrous these efforts to translate 
	Into one's private tongue a public fate! 
	Instead of poetry divinely terse, 
	Disjointed notes, Insomnia's mean verse!
	
	_Life is a message scribbled in the dark._ 
	Anonymous. Espied on a pine's bark, 
	As we were walking home the day she died, 
	An empty emerald case, squat and frog-eyed, 
	Hugging the trunk; and its companion piece, 
240	A gum-logged ant. That Englishman in Nice, 
	A proud and happy linguist: je nourris 
	Les pauvres cigales - meaning that he 
	Fed the poor sea gulls! Lafontaine was wrong: 
	Dead is the mandible, alive the song.
	
	And so I pare my nails, and muse, and hear 
	Your steps upstairs, and all is right, my dear.
	
	Sybil, throughout our high-school days I knew 
	Your loveliness, but fell in love with you 
	During an outing of the senior class 
250	To New Wye Falls. We luncheoned on damp grass. 
	Our teacher of geology discussed 
	The cataract. Its roar and rainbow dust 
	Made the tame park romantic. I reclined 
	In April's haze immediately behind 
	Your slender back and watched your neat small head 
	Bend to one side. One palm with fingers spread, 
	Between a star of trillium and a stone, 
	Pressed on the turf. A little phalange bone 
	Kept twitching. Then you turned and offered me 
260	A thimbleful of bright metallic tea.
	
	Your profile has not changed. The glistening teeth 
	Biting the careful lip; the shade beneath 
	The eye from the long lashes; the peach down 
	Rimming the cheekbone; the dark silky brown 
	Of hair brushed up from temple and from nape; 
	The very naked neck; the Persian shape 
	Of nose and eyebrow, you have kept it all - 
	And on still nights we hear the waterfall.
	
	Come and be worshiped, come and be caressed, 
270	My dark Vanessa, crimson-barred, my blest 
	My Admirable butterfly! Explain 
	How could you, in the gloam of Lilac Lane, 
	Have let uncouth, hysterical John Shade 
	Blubber your face, and ear, and shoulder blade?
	
	We have been married forty years. At least 
	Four thousand times your pillow has been creased 
	By our two heads. Four hundred thousand times 
	The tall clock with the hoarse Westminster chimes 
	Has marked our common hour. How many more 
280	Free calendars shall grace the kitchen door?
	
	I love you when you're standing on the lawn 
	Peering at something in a tree: "It's gone. 
	It was so small. It might come back" (all this 
	Voiced in a whisper softer than a kiss). 
	I love you when you call me to admire 
	A jet's pink trail above the sunset fire. 
	I love you when you're humming as you pack 
	A suitcase or the farcical car sack 
	With round-trip zipper. And I love you most 
290	When with a pensive nod you greet her ghost 
	And hold her first toy on your palm, or look 
	At a postcard from her, found in a book.
	
	She might have been you, me, or some quaint blend: 
	Nature chose me so as to wrench and rend 
	Your heart and mine. At first we'd smile and say: 
	"All little girls are plump" or "Jim McVey 
	(The family oculist) will cure that slight 
	Squint in no time." And later. "She'll be quite 
	Pretty, you know"; and, trying to assuage 
300	The swelling torment: "That's the awkward age."
	"She should take riding lessons," you would say 
	(Your eyes and mine not meeting). "She should play 
	Tennis, or badminton. Less starch, more fruit! 
	She may not be a beauty, but she's cute."
	
	It was no use, no use. The prizes won 
	In French and history, no doubt, were fun; 
	At Christmas parties games were rough, no doubt, 
	And one shy little guest might be left out; 
	But let's be fair: while children of her age 
310	Were cast as elves and fairies on the stage 
	That she'd helped paint for the school pantomime, 
	My gentle girl appeared as Mother Time, 
	A bent charwoman with slop pail and broom, 
	And like a fool I sobbed in the men's room.
	
	Another winter was scrape-scooped away.
	The Toothwort White haunted our woods in May. 
	Summer was power-mowed, and autumn, burned. 
	Alas, the dingy cygnet never turned 
	Into a wood duck. And again your voice: 
320	"But this is prejudice! You should rejoice 
	That she is innocent. Why overstress 
	The physical? She _wants_ to look a mess. 
	Virgins have written some _resplendent_ books. 
	Lovemaking is not everything. Good looks 
	Are not that indispensable!" And still 
	Old Pan would call from every painted hill. 
	
	And still the demons of our pity spoke: 
	No lips would share the lipstick of her smoke; 
	The telephone that rang before a ball 
330	Every two minutes in Sorosa Hall 
	For her would never ring; and, with a great 
	Screeching of tires on gravel, to the gate 
	Out of the lacquered night, a white-scarfed beau 
	Would never come for her; she'd never go, 
	A dream of gauze and jasmine, to that dance. 
	We sent her, though, to a château in France.
	
	And she returned in tears, with new defeats, 
	New miseries. On days when all the streets 
	Of College Town led to the game, she'd sit 
340	On the library steps, and read or knit; 
	Mostly alone she'd be, or with that nice 
	Frail roommate, now a nun; and, once or twice, 
	With a Korean boy who took my course. 
	
	She had strange fears, strange fantasies, strange force 
	Of character - as when she spent three nights 
	Investigating certain sounds and lights 
	In an old barn. She twisted words: pot, top, 
	Spider, redips. And "powder" was "red wop." 
	She called you a didactic katydid.
350	She hardly ever smiled, and when she did, 
	It was a sign of pain. She'd criticize 
	Ferociously our projects, and with eyes 
	Expressionless sit on her tumbled bed 
	Spreading her swollen feet, scratching her head 
	With psoriatic fingernails, and moan, 
	Murmuring dreadful words in monotone.
	
	She was my darling - difficult, morose - 
	But still my darling. You remember those 
	Almost unruffled evenings when we played 
360	Mah-jongg, or she tried on your furs, which made 
	Her almost fetching; and the mirrors smiled, 
	The lights were merciful, the shadows mild, 
	Sometimes I'd help her with a Latin text, 
	Or she'd be reading in her bedroom, next 
	To my fluorescent lair, and you would be 
	In your own study, twice removed from me, 
	And I would hear both voices now and then: 
370	"Mother, what's grimpen?" "What is what?" "Grim Pen." 
	Pause, and your guarded scholium. Then again: 
	"Mother, what's chtonic?" That, too, you'd explain, 
	Appending, "Would you like a tangerine?"
	"No. Yes. And what does sempiternal mean?" 
	You'd hesitate. And lustily I'd roar 
	The answer from my desk through the closed door.
	
	It does not matter what it was she read 
	(some phony modern poem that was said 
	In English Lit to be a document 
	"Engazhay and compelling" - what this meant 
	Nobody cared); the point is that the three 
380	Chambers, then bound by you and her and me, 
	Now form a tryptich or a three-act play 
	In which portrayed events forever stay.
	
	I think she always nursed a small mad hope.
	
	I'd finished recently my book on Pope. 
	Jane Dean, my typist, offered her one day 
	To meet Pete Dean, a cousin. Jane's fiancé 
	Would then take all of them in his new car 
	A score of miles to a Hawaiian bar. 
	The boy was picked up at a quarter past 
390	Eight in New Wye. Sleet glazed the roads. At last 
	They found the place - when suddenly Pete Dean 
	Clutching his brow exclaimed that he had clean
	Forgotten an appointment with a chum 
	Who'd land in jail if he, Pete, did not come, 
	Et cetera. She said she understood. 
	After he'd gone the three young people stood 
	Before the azure entrance for awhile. 
	Puddles were neon-barred; and with a smile 
	She said she'd be de trop, she'd much prefer 
400	Just going home. Her friends escorted her 
	To the bus stop and left; but she, instead 
	Of riding home, got off at Lochanhead.
	
	You scrutinized your wrist: "It's eight fifteen.
	[And here time forked.] I'll turn it on." The screen 
	In its blank-broth evolved a lifelike blur, 
	And music welled. _He took one look at her, 
	And shot a death ray at well-meaning Jane._
	
	A male hand traced from Florida to Maine
	The curving arrows of Aeolian wars.
410	You said that later a quartet of bores, 
	Two writers and two critics, would debate 
	The Cause of Poetry on Channel 8.
	A nymph came pirouetting, under white
	Rotating petals, in a vernal rite
	To kneel before an altar in a wood
	Where various articles of toilet stood.
	
	I went upstairs and read a galley proof,
	And heard the wind roll marbles on the roof.
	"See the blind beggar dance, the cripple sing" 
420	Has unmistakably the vulgar ring 
	Of its preposterous age. Then came your call, 
	My tender mockingbird, up from the hall. 
	I was in time to overhear brief fame 
	And have a cup of tea with you: my name 
	Was mentioned twice, as usual just behind 
	(one oozy footstep)	Frost. "_Sure you don't mind? 
	I'll catch the Exton plane, because you know 
	If I don't come by midnight with the dough_ -"
	
	And then there was a kind of travelog: 
430	A host narrator took us through the fog 
	Of a March night, where headlights from afar 
	Approached and grew like a dilating star, 
	To the green, indigo and tawny, sea 
	Which we had visited in thirty-three, 
	Nine months before her birth. Now it was all 
	Pepper-and-salt, and hardly could recall 
	That first long ramble, the relentless light, 
	The flock of sails (one blue among the white 
	Clashed queerly with the sea, and two were red), 
440	The man in the old blazer, crumbing bread, 
	The crowding gulls insufferably loud, 
	And one dark pigeon waddling in the crowd. 
	
	"Was that the phone?" You listened at the door. 
	More headlights in the fog. There was no sense 
	In window-rubbing: only some white fence 
	And the reflector poles passed by unmasked.
	"Are we quite sure she's acting right?" you asked. 
	"It's technically a blind date, of course.
450	Well, shall we try the preview of Remorse?" 
	And we allowed, in all tranquillity, 
	The famous film to spread its charmed marquee; 
	The famous face flowed in, fair and inane: 
	The parted lips, the swimming eyes, the grain 
	Of beauty on the cheek, odd gallicism, 
	And the soft form dissolving in the prism 
	Of corporate desire. "I think," she said, 
	"I'll get off here." "It's only Lochanhead."
	"Yes, that's okay." Gripping the stang, she peered 
460	At ghostly trees. Bus stopped. Bus disappeared.
	
	Thunder above the Jungle. "No, not that!" 
	Pat Pink, our guest (antiatomic chat). 
	Eleven struck. You sighed. "Well, I'm afraid 
	There's nothing else of interest." You played 
	Network roulette: the dial turned and tricked. 
	Commercials were beheaded. Faces flicked. 
	An open mouth in midsong was struck out. 
	An imbecile with sideburns was about 
	To use his gun, but you were much too quick.
470	A jovial Negro raised his trumpet. Trk. 
	Your ruby ring made life and laid the law. 
	Oh, switch it off! And as life snapped we saw 
	A pinhead light dwindle and die in black 
	Infinity. Out of his lakeside shack 
	A watchman, Father Time, all gray and bent, 
	Emerged with his uneasy dog and went 
	Along the reedy bank. He came too late.
	
	You gently yawned and stacked away your plate. 
	We heard the wind. We heard it rush and throw 
480	Twigs at the windowpane. Phone ringing? No. 
	I helped you with the dishes. The tall clock 
	Kept on demolishing young root, old rock.
	
	"Midnight," you said. What's midnight to the young? 
	And suddenly a festive blaze was flung 
	Across five cedar trunks, snowpatches showed, 
	And a patrol car on our bumpy road 
	Came to a crunching stop. Retake, retake!

	People have thought she tried to cross the lake
	At Lochan Neck where zesty skaters crossed 
490	From Exe to Wye on days of special frost. 
	Others supposed she might have lost her way 
	By turning left from Bridgeroad; and some say 
	She took her poor young life. I know. You know.
	
	It was a night of thaw, a night of blow, 
	With great excitement in the air. Black spring 
	Stood just around the corner, shivering 
	In the wet starlight and on the wet ground. 
	The lake lay in the mist, its ice half drowned. 
	A blurry shape stepped off the reedy bank 
500	Into a crackling, gulping swamp, and sank.




Canto Three

	L'if, lifeless tree! Your great Maybe, Rabelais: 
	The grand potato. I.P.H., a lay
	Institute (I) of Preparation (P) 
	For the Hereafter (H), or If, as we 
	Called it - big if! - engaged me for one term 
	To speak on death ("to lecture on the Worm," 
	Wrote President McAber). You and I, 
	And she, then a mere tot, moved from New Wye 
	To Yewshade, in another, higher state.
510	I love great mountains. From the iron gate 
	Of the ramshackle house we rented there 
	One saw a snowy form, so far, so fair, 
	That one could only fetch a sigh, as if 
	It might assist assimilation. Iph 
	Was a larvorium and a violet: 
	A grave in Reason's early spring. And yet 
	It missed the gist of the whole thing; it missed 
	What mostly interests the preterist; 
	For we die every day; oblivion thrives 
520	Not on dry thighbones but on blood-ripe lives, 
	And our best yesterdays are now foul piles 
	Of crumpled names, phone numbers and foxed files. 
	
	I'm ready to become a floweret 
	Or a fat fly, but never, to forget. 
	And I'll turn down eternity unless 
	The melancholy and the tenderness 
	Of mortal life; the passion and the pain; 
	The claret taillight of that dwindling plane 
	Off Hesperus; your gesture of dismay 
530	On running out of cigarettes; the way 
	You smile at dogs; the trail of silver slime 
	Snails leave on flagstones; this good ink, this rhyme, 
	This index card, this slender rubber band 
	Which always forms, when dropped, an ampersand, 
	Are found in Heaven by the newly dead 
	Stored in its strongholds through the years.

	Instead The Institute assumed it might be wise
	Not to expect too much of paradise: 
	What if there's nobody to say hullo 
	To the newcomer, no reception, no 
540	Indoctrination? What if you are tossed 
	Into a boundless void, your bearings lost, 
	Your spirit stripped and utterly alone, 
	Your task unfinished, your despair unknown, 
	Your body just beginning to putresce, 
	A non-undresssable in morning dress, 
	Your widow lying prone on a dim bed, 
	Herself a blur in your dissolving head!
	
	While snubbing gods, including the big G, 
550	Iph borrowed some peripheral debris 
	From mystic visions; and it offered tips 
	(The amber spectacles for life's eclipse) - 
	How not to panic when you're made a ghost: 
	Sidle and slide, choose a smooth surd, and coast, 
	Meet solid bodies and glissade right through, 
	Or let a person circulate through you. 
	How to locate in blackness, with a gasp, 
	Terra the Fair, an orbicle of jasp. 
	How to keep sane in spiral types of space.
560	Precautions to be taken in the case 
	Of freak reincarnation: what to do 
	On suddenly discovering that you 
	Are now a young and vulnerable toad 
	Plump in the middle of a busy road, 
	Or a bear cub beneath a burning pine, 
	Or a book mite in a revived divine.
	
	Time means succession, and succession, change: 
	Hence timelessness is bound to disarrange 
	Schedules of sentiment. We give advice 
570	To widower. He has been married twice: 
	He meets his wives; both loved, both loving, both 
	Jealous of one another. Time means growth. 
	And growth means nothing in Elysian life.
	Fondling a changeless child, the flax-haired wife 
	Grieves on the brink of a remembered pond 
	Full of a dreamy sky. And, also blond, 
	But with a touch of tawny in the shade, 
	Feet up, knees clasped, on a stone balustrade 
	The other sits and raises a moist gaze 
580	Toward the blue impenetrable haze.
	How to begin? Which first to kiss? What toy 
	To give the babe? Does that small solemn boy 
	Know of the head-on crash which on a wild 
	March night killed both the mother and the child? 
	And she, the second love, with instep bare 
	In ballerina black, why does she wear 
	The earrings from the other's jewel case? 
	And why does she avert her fierce young face?

	For as we know from dreams it is so hard 
590	To speak to our dear dead! They disregard 
	Our apprehension, queaziness and shame - 
	The awful sense that they're not quite the same. 
	And our school chum killed in a distant war 
	Is not surprised to see us at his door. 
	And in a blend of jauntiness and gloom 
	Points at the puddles in his basement room.
	
	But who can teach the thoughts we should roll-call 
	When morning finds us marching to the wall 
	Under the stage direction of some goon 
600	Political, some uniformed baboon?
	We'll think of matters only known to us - 
	Empires of rhyme, Indies of calculus; 
	Listen to distant cocks crow, and discern 
	Upon the rough gray wall a rare wall fern; 
	And while our royal hands are being tied, 
	Taunt our inferiors, cheerfully deride 
	The dedicated imbeciles, and spit 
	Into their eyes just for the fun of it.
	
	Nor can one help the exile, the old man 
610	Dying in a motel, with the loud fan 
	Revolving in the torrid prairie night 
	And, from the outside, bits of colored light 
	Reaching his bed like dark hands from the past 
	He suffocates and conjures in two tongues 
	The nebulae dilating in his lungs.
	
	A wrench, a rift - that's all one can foresee. 
	Maybe one finds le grand néant; maybe 
	Again one spirals from the tuber's eye.
620	As you remarked the last time we went by 
	The Institute: "I really could not tell 
	The differences between this place and Hell."
	
	We heard cremationists guffaw and snort 
	At Grabermann's denouncing the Retort 
	As detrimental to the birth of wraiths.
	We all avoided criticizing faiths. 
	The great Starover Blue reviewed the role 
	Planets had played as landfalls of the soul. 
	The fate of beasts was pondered. A Chinese 
630	Discanted on the etiquette at teas 
	With ancestors, and how far up to go.
	I tore apart the fantasies of Poe,
	And dealt with childhood memories of strange
	Nacreous gleams beyond the adults' range.
	
	Among our auditors were a young priest
	And an old Communist. Iph could at least
	Compete with churches and the party line.
	In later years it started to decline: 
	Buddhism took root. A medium smuggled in 
640	Pale jellies and a floating mandolin. 
	Fra Karamazov, mumbling his inept 
	All is allowed, into some classes crept; 
	And to fulfill the fish wish of the womb, 
	A school of Freudians headed for the tomb.
	
	That tasteless venture helped me in a way. 
	I learnt what to ignore in my survey 
	Of death's abyss. And when we lost our child 
	I knew there would be nothing: no self-styled 
	Spirit would touch a keyboard of dry wood 
650	To rap out her pet name; no phantom would 
	Rise gracefully to welcome you and me 
	In the dark garden, near the shagbark tree.
	
	"What is that funny creaking - do you hear?"
	"It is the shutter on the stairs, my dear."
	"If you're not sleeping, let's turn on the light.
	I hate that wind! Let's play some chess." "All right."
	"I'm sure it's not the shutter. There - again."
	"It is a tendril fingering the pane."
	"What glided down the roof and made that thud?" 
660	"It is old winter tumbling in the mud."
	"And now what shall I do? My knight is pinned."
	Who rides so late in the night and the wind? 
	It is the writer's grief. It is the wild 
	March wind. It is the father with his child.
	
	Later came minutes, hours, whole days at last, 
	When she'd be absent from our thoughts, so fast 
	Did life, the woolly caterpillar run. 
	We went to Italy. Sprawled in the sun. 
	On a white beach with other pink or brown 
670	Americans. Flew back to our small town.
	Found that my bunch of essays The Untamed 
	Seahorse was "universally acclaimed" 
	(It sold three hundred copies in one year).
	Again school started, and on hillsides, where 
	Wound distant roads, one saw the steady stream 
	Of carlights all returning to the dream 
	Of college education. You went on 
	Translating into French Marvell and Donne. 
	
	It was a year of Tempests: Hurricane 
680	Lolita Swept from Florida to Maine.
	Mars glowed. Shahs married. Gloomy Russians spied. 
	Lang made your portrait. And one night I died.
	
	The Crashaw Club had paid me to discuss 
	Why Poetry Is Meaningful to Us. 
	I gave my sermon, a dull thing but short. 
	As I was leaving in some haste, to thwart 
	The so-called "question period" at the end, 
	One of those peevish people who attend 
	Such talks only to say they disagree 
690	Stood up and pointed with his pipe at me.
	And then it happened - the attack, the trance, 
	Or one of my old fits. There sat by chance 
	A doctor in the front row. At his feet 
	Patly I fell. My heart had stopped to beat, 
	It seems, and several moments passed before 
	It heaved and went on trudging to a more 
	Conclusive destination. 
	
									Give me now 
	Your full attention. I can't tell you how 
	I knew - but I did know that I had crossed 
700	The border. Everything I loved was lost 
	But no aorta could report regret. 
	A sun of rubber was convulsed and set; 
	And blood-black nothingness began to spin 
	A system of cells interlinked within 
	Cells interlinked within cells interlinked 
	Within one stem. And dreadfully distinct 
	Against the dark, a tall white fountain played.
	I realized, of course, that it was made 
	Not of our atoms; that the sense behind 
710	The scene was not our sense. In life, the mind 
	Of any man is quick to recognize 
	Natural shams, and then before his eyes 
	The reed becomes a bird, the knobby twig 
	An inchworm, and the cobra head, a big 
	Wickedly folded moth. But in the case 
	Of my white fountain what it did replace 
	Perceptually was something that, I felt, 
	Could be grasped only by whoever dwelt 
	In the strange world where I was a mere stray.

720	And presently I saw it melt away: 
	Though still unconscious I was back on earth. 
	The tale I told provoked my doctor's mirth. 
	He doubted very much that in the state 
	He found me in "one could hallucinate 
	Or dream in any sense. Later, perhaps, 
	But not during the actual collapse. 
	No, Mr. Shade." But, Doctor, I was dead! 
	He smiled. "Not quite: just half a shade," he said.
	
	However, I demurred. In mind I kept 
	Replaying the whole thing. Again I stepped 
730	Down from the platform, and felt strange and hot, 
	And saw that chap stand up, and toppled, not 
	Because a heckler pointed with his pipe, 
	But probably because the time was ripe 
	For just that bump and wobble on the part 
	Of a limp blimp, an old unstable heart.
	
	My vision reeked with truth. It had the tone, 
	The quiddity and quaintness of its own 
	Reality. It was. As time went on.
740	Its constant vertical in triumph shone.
	Often when troubled by the outer glare 
	Of street and strife, inward I'd turn, and there, 
	There in the background of my soul it stood, 
	Old Faithful! And its presence always would 
	Console me wonderfully. Then, one day, 
	I came across what seemed a twin display.
	
	It was a story in a magazine 
	About a Mrs. Z. whose heart had been 
	Rubbed back to life by a prompt surgeon's hand.
750	She told her interviewer of "The Land 
	Beyond the Veil" and the account contained 
	A hint of angels, and a glint of stained 
	Windows, and some soft music, and a choice 
	Of hymnal items, and her mother's voice; 
	But at the end she mentioned a remote 
	Landscape, a hazy orchard - and I quote: 
	"Beyond that orchard through a kind of smoke 
	I glimpsed a tall white fountain - and awoke."
	
	If on some nameless island Captain Schmidt 
760	Sees a new animal and captures it, 
	And if, a little later, Captain Smith 
	Brings back a skin, that island is no myth. 
	Our fountain was a signpost and a mark 
	Objectively enduring in the dark, 
	Strong as a bone, substantial as a tooth, 
	And almost vulgar in its robust truth!
	
	The article was by Jim Coates. To Jim 
	Forthwith I wrote. Got her address from him. 
	Drove west three hundred miles to talk to her.
770	Arrived. Was met by an impassioned purr.
	Saw that blue hair, those freckled hands, that rapt 
	Orchideous air - and knew that I was trapped.
	
	"Who'd miss the opportunity to meet 
	A poet so distinguished?" It was sweet 
	Of me to come! I desperately tried 
	To ask my questions. They were brushed aside: 
	"Perhaps some other time." The journalist 
	Still had her scribblings. I should not insist. 
	She plied me with fruit cake, turning it all 
780	Into an idiotic social call.
	"I can't believe," she said, "that it is you! 
	I loved your poem in the Blue Review. 
	That one about Mon Blon. I have a niece 
	Who's climbed the Matterhorn. The other piece 
	I could not understand. I mean the sense. 
	Because, of course, the sound - But I'm so dense!"
	
	She was. I might have persevered. I might 
	Have made her tell me more about the white 
	Fountain we both had seen "beyond the veil" 
790	But if (I thought) I mentioned that detail 
	She'd pounce upon it, as upon a fond 
	Affinity, a sacramental bond, 
	Uniting mystically her and me, 
	And in a jiffy our two souls would be 
	Brother and sister trembling on the brink 
	Of tender incest. "Well," I said, "I think 
	It's getting late..." 
	
							I also called on Coates. 
	He was afraid he had mislaid her notes. 
	He took his article from a steel file: 
800	"It's accurate. I have not changed her style.
	There's one misprint - not that it matters much: 
	Mountain, not fountain. The majestic touch."

	Life Everlasting - based on a misprint!
	I mused as I drove homeward: take the hint,
	And stop investigating my abyss?
	But all at once it dawned on me that this
	Was the real point, the contrapuntal theme;
	Just this: not text, but texture; not the dream
	But a topsy-turvical coincidence,
810	Not flimsy nonsense, but a web of sense. 
	Yes! It sufficed that I in life could find 
	Some kind of link-and-bobolink, some kind 
	Of correlated pattern in the game, 
	Plexed artistry, and something of the same 
	Pleasure in it as they who played it found.
	
	It did not matter who they were. No sound, 
	No furtive light came from their involute 
	Abode, but there they were, aloof and mute, 
	Playing a game of worlds, promoting pawns 
820	To ivory unicorns and ebon fauns; 
	Kindling a long life here, extinguishing 
	A short one there; killing a Balkan king; 
	Causing a chunk of ice formed on a high
	Flying airplane to plummet from the sky 
	And strike a farmer dead; hiding my keys, 
	Glasses or pipe. Coordinating these 
	Events and objects with remote events 
	And vanished objects. Making ornaments 
	Of accidents and possibilities.

830	Stormcoated, I strode in: Sybil, it is
	My firm conviction - "Darling, shut the door.
	Had a nice trip?" Splendid - but what is more
	I have returned convinced that I can grope
	My way to some - to some - "Yes, dear?" Faint hope.




Canto Four


	Now I shall spy on beauty as none has 
	Spied on it yet. Now I shall cry out as 
	None has cried out. Now I shall try what none 
	Has tried. Now I shall do what none has done. 
	And speaking of this wonderful machine: 
840	I'm puzzled by the difference between 
	Two methods of composing: A, the kind 
	Which goes on solely in the poet's mind, 
	A testing of performing words, while he 
	Is soaping a third time one leg, and B, 
	The other kind, much more decorous, when 
	He's in his study writing with a pen.
	
	In method B the hand supports the thought, 
	The abstract battle is concretely fought. 
	The pen stops in mid-air, then swoops to bar 
850	A canceled sunset or restore a star, 
	And thus it physically guides the phrase 
	Toward faint daylight through the inky maze.
	
	But method A is agony! The brain 
	Is soon enclosed in a steel cap of pain. 
	A muse in overalls directs the drill 
	Which grinds and which no effort of the will 
	Can interrupt, while the automaton 
	Is taking off what he has just put on 
	Or walking briskly to the corner store 
860	To buy the paper he has read before.
	Why is it so? Is it, perhaps, because 
	In penless work there is no pen-poised pause 
	And one must use three hands at the same time, 
	Having to choose the necessary rhyme, 
	Hold the completed line before one's eyes, 
	And keep in mind all the preceding tries? 
	Or is the process deeper with no desk 
	To prop the false and hoist the poetesque? 
	For there are those mysterious moments when 
870	Too weary to delete, I drop my pen; 
	I ambulate - and by some mute command 
	The right word flutes and perches on my hand.
	
	My best time is the morning; my preferred 
	Season, midsummer. I once overheard 
	Myself awakening while half of me 
	Still slept in bed. I tore my spirit free, 
	And caught up with myself - upon the lawn 
	Where clover leaves cupped the topaz of dawn, 
	And where Shade stood in nightshirt and one shoe.
880	And then I realized that this half too
	Was fast asleep; both laughed and I awoke 
	Safe in my bed as day its eggshell broke, 
	And robins walked and stopped, and on the damp 
	Gemmed turf a brown shoe lay! My secret stamp, 
	The Shade impress, the mystery inborn. 
	Mirages, miracles, midsummer morn. 
	
	Since my biographer may be too staid 
	Or know too little to affirm that Shade 
	Shaved in his bath, here goes: "He'd fixed a sort 
890	Of hinge-and-screw affair, a steel support 
	Running across the tub to hold in place 
	The shaving mirror right before his face 
	And with his toe renewing tap-warmth, he'd 
	Sit like a king there, and like Marat bleed."
	The more I weigh, the less secure my skin; 
	In places it's ridiculously thin; 
	Thus near the mouth: the space between its wick 
	And my grimace, invites the wicked nick. 
	Or this dewlap: some day I must set free 
900	The Newport Frill inveterate in me. 
	My Adam's apple is a prickly pear: 
	Now I shall speak of evil and despair 
	As none has spoken. Five, six, seven, eight, 
	Nine strokes are not enough. Ten. I palpate 
	Through strawberry-and-cream the gory mess 
	And find unchanged that patch of prickliness.
	
	I have my doubts about the one-armed bloke 
	Who in commercials with one gliding stroke 
	Clears a smooth path of flesh from ear to chin, 
910	Then wipes his face and fondly tries his skin. 
	I'm in the class of fussy bimanists. 
	As a discreet ephebe in tights assists 
	A female in an acrobatic dance, 
	My left hand helps, and holds, and shifts its stance.
	
	Now I shall speak... Better than any soap 
	Is the sensation for which poets hope 
	When inspiration and its icy blaze, 
	The sudden image, the immediate phrase 
	Over the skin a triple ripple send 
920	Making the little hairs all stand on end 
	As in the enlarged animated scheme 
	Of whiskers mowed when held up by Our Cream.

	Now I shall speak of evil as none has
	Spoken before. I loathe such things as jazz;
	The white-hosed moron torturing a black
	Bull, rayed with red; abstractist bric-a-brac;
	Primitivist folk-masks; progressive schools;
	Music in supermarkets; swimming pools;
	Brutes, bores, class-conscious Philistines, Freud, Marx,
930	Fake thinkers, puffed-up poets, frauds and sharks.
	
	And while the safety blade with scrape and screak 
	Travels across the country of my cheek; 
	Cars on the highway pass, and up the steep 
	Incline big trucks around my jawbone creep, 
	And now a silent liner docks, and now 
	Sunglassers tour Beirut, and now I plough 
	Old Zembla's fields where my gay stubble grows, 
	And slaves make hay between my mouth and nose.
	
	Man's life as commentary to abstruse 
940	Unfinished poem. Note for further use.
	
	Dressing in all the rooms, I rhyme and roam 
	Throughout the house with, in my fist, a comb 
	Or a shoehorn, which turns into the spoon 
	I eat my egg with. In the afternoon 
	You drive me to the library. We dine 
	At half past six. And that odd muse of mine, 
	My versipel, is with me everywhere, 
	In carrel and in car, and in my chair.
	
	And all the time, and all the time, my love, 
950	You too are there, beneath the word, above 
	The syllable, to underscore and stress 
	The vital rhythm. One heard a woman's dress 
	Rustle in days of yore. I've often caught 
	The sound and sense of your approaching thought. 
	And all in you is youth, and you make new, 
	By quoting them, old things I made for you.
	
	Dim Gulf was my first book (free verse); Night Rote 
	Came next; then Hebe's Cup, my final float 
	In that damp carnival, for now I term 
960	Everything "Poems," and no longer squirm. 
	(But this transparent thingum does require 
	Some moondrop title. Help me, Will! Pale Fire.)
	
	Gently the day has passed in a sustained 
	Low hum of harmony. The brain is drained 
	And a brown ament, and the noun I meant 
	To use but did not, dry on the cement. 
	Maybe my sensual love for the consonne 
	D'appui, Echo's fey child, is based upon 
	A feeling of fantastically planned, 
970	Richly rhymed life.	I feel I understand 
	Existence, or at least a minute part 
	Of my existence, only through my art, 
	In terms of combinational delight; 
	And if my private universe scans right, 
	So does the verse of galaxies divine 
	Which I suspect is an iambic line. 
	I'm reasonably sure that we survive 
	And that my darling somewhere is alive, 
	As I am reasonably sure that I 
980	Shall wake at six tomorrow, on July 
	The twenty-second, nineteen fifty-nine, 
	And that the day will probably be fine; 
	So this alarm clock let me set myself, 
	Yawn, and put back Shade's "Poems" on their shelf.
	
	But it's not bedtime yet. The sun attains 
	Old Dr. Sutton's last two windowpanes. 
	The man must be - what? Eighty? Eighty-two? 
	Was twice my age the year I married you. 
	Where are you? In the garden. I can see 
990	Part of your shadow near the shagbark tree.
	Somewhere horseshoes are being tossed. Click, Clunk.
	(Leaning against its lamppost like a drunk.)
	A dark Vanessa with crimson band
	Wheels in the low sun, settles on the sand
	And shows its ink-blue wingtips flecked with white.
	And through the flowing shade and ebbing light
	A man, unheedful of the butterfly -
	Some neighbor's gardener, I guess - goes by 
	Trundling an empty barrow up the lane.




COMMENTARY

Lines 1-4: I was the shadow of the waxwing slain, etc.
	The image in these opening lines evidently refers to a bird knocking itself out, in full flight, against the outer surface of a glass pane in which a mirrored sky, with its slightly darker tint and slightly slower cloud, presents the illusion of continued space. We can visualize John Shade in his early boyhood, a physically unattractive but otherwise beautifully developed lad, experiencing his first eschatological shock, as with incredulous fingers he picks up from the turf that compact ovoid body and gazes at the wax-red streaks ornamenting those gray-brown wings and at the graceful tail feathers tipped with yellow as bright as fresh paint. When in the last year of Shade's life I had the fortune of being his neighbor in the idyllic hills of New Wye (see Foreword), I often saw those particular birds most convivially feeding on the chalk-blue berries of junipers growing at the corner of his house. (See also lines 181-182.)
	My knowledge of garden Aves had been limited to those of northern Europe but a young New Wye gardener, in whom I was interested (see note to line 998), helped me to identify the profiles of quite a number of tropical-looking little strangers and their comical calls; and, naturally, every tree top plotted its dotted line toward the ornithological work on my desk to which I would gallop from the lawn in nomenclatorial agitation. How hard I found to fit the name "robin" to the suburban impostor, the gross fowl, with its untidy dull-red livery and the revolting gusto it showed when consuming long, sad, passive worms!
	Incidentally, it is curious to note that a crested bird called in Zemblan sampel ("silktail"); closely resembling a waxwing in shape and shade, is the model of one of the three heraldic creatures (the other two being respectively a reindeer proper and a merman azure, crined or) in the armorial bearings of the Zemblan King, Charles the Beloved (born 1915), whose glorious misfortunes I discussed so often with my friend.
	The poem was begun at the dead center of the year, a few minutes after midnight July 1, while I played chess with a young Iranian enrolled in our summer school; and I do not doubt that our poet would have understood his annotator's temptation to synchronize a certain fateful fact, the departure from Zembla of the would-be regicide Gradus, with that date. Actually, Gradus left Onhava on the Copenhagen plane on July 5.



Line 12: that crystal land

Perhaps an allusion to Zembla, my dear country. After this, in the disjointed, half-obliterated draft which I am not at all sure I have deciphered properly: 

	Ah, I must not forget to say something 
	That my friend told me of a certain king.
	
	Alas, he would have said a great deal more if a domestic anti-Karlist had not controlled every line he communicated to her! Many a time have I rebuked him in bantering fashion: "You really should promise to use all that wonderful stuff, you bad gray poet, you!" And we would both giggle like boys. But then, after the inspiring evening stroll, we had to part, and grim night lifted the drawbridge between his impregnable fortress and my humble home.
	That King's reign (1936-1958) will be remembered by at least a few discerning historians as a peaceful and elegant one. Owing to a fluid system of judicious alliances, Mars in his time never marred the record. Internally, until corruption, betrayal, and Extremism penetrated it, the People's Place (parliament) worked in perfect harmony with the Royal Council. Harmony, indeed, was the reign's password. The polite arts and pure sciences flourished. Technicology, applied physics, industrial chemistry and so forth were suffered to thrive. A small skyscraper of ultramarine glass was steadily rising in Onhava. The climate seemed to be improving. Taxation had become a thing of beauty. The poor were getting a little richer, and the rich a little poorer (in accordance with what may be known some day as Kinbote's Law). Medical care was spreading to the confines of the state: less and less often, on his tour of the country, every autumn, when the rowans hung coral-heavy, and the puddles tinkled with Muscovy glass, the friendly and eloquent monarch would be interrupted by a pertussal "back-draucht" in a crowd of schoolchildren. Parachuting had become a popular sport. Everybody, in a word, was content - even the political mischiefmakers who were contentedly making mischief paid by a contented Sosed (Zembla's gigantic neighbor). But let us not pursue this tiresome subject.
	To return to the King: take for instance the question of personal culture. How often is it that kings engage in some special research? Conchologists among them can be counted on the fngers of one maimed hand. The last king of Zembla - partly under the influence of his uncle Conmal, the great translator of Shakespeare (see notes to lines 39 - 40 and 962), had become, despite frequent migraines, passionately addicted to the study of literature. At forty, not long before the collapse of his throne, he had attained such a degree of scholarship that he dared accede to his venerable uncle's raucous dying request: "Teach, Karlik!" Of course, it would have been unseemly for a monarch to appear in the robes of learning at a university lectern and present to rosy youths Finnigans Wake as a monstrous extension of Angus MacDiarmid's "incoherent transactions" and of Southey's Lingo-Grande ("Dear Stumparumper," etc.) or discuss the Zemblan variants, collected in 1798 by Hodinski, of the Kongs-skugg-sio (The Royal Mirror), an anonymous masterpiece of the twelfth century. Therefore he lectured under an assumed name and in a heavy make-up, with wig and false whiskers. All brown-bearded, apple-checked, blue-eyed Zemblans look alike, and I who have not shaved now for a year, resemble my disguised king (see also note to line 894).
	During these periods of teaching, Charles Xavier made it a rule to sleep at a pied-à-terre he had rented, as any scholarly citizen would, in Coriolanus Lane: a charming, central-heated studio with adjacent bathroom and kitchenette. One recalls with nostalgic pleasure its light gray carpeting and pearl-gray walls (one of them graced with a solitary copy of Picasso's Chandelier, pot et casserole émaillée), a shelfful of calf-bound poets, and a virginal-looking daybed under its rug of imitation panda fur. How far from this limpid simplicity seemed the palace and the odious Council Chamber with its unsolvable problems and frightened councilors!



Line 17: And then the gradual; Line 29: gray

By an extraordinary coincidence (inherent perhaps in the contrapuntal nature of Shade's art) our poet seems to name here (gradual, gray) a man, whom he was to see for one fatal moment three weeks later, but of whose existence at the time (July 2) he could not have known. Jakob Gradus called himself variously Jack Degree or Jacques de Grey, or James de Gray, and also appears in police records as Ravus, Ravenstone, and d'Argus. Having a morbid affection for the ruddy Russia of the Soviet era, he contended that the real origin of his name should be sought in the Russian word for grape, vinograd, to which a Latin suffix had adhered, making it Vinogradus. His father, Martin Gradus, had been a Protestant minister in Riga, but except for him and a maternal uncle (Roman Tselovalnikov, police officer and part-time member of the Social-Revolutionary party), the whole clan seems to have been in the liquor business. Martin Gradus died in 1920, and his widow moved to Strasbourg where she soon died, too. Another Gradus, an Alsatian merchant, who oddly enough was totally unrelated to our killer but had been a close business friend of his kinsmen for years, adopted the boy and raised him with his own children. It would seem that at one time young Gradus studied pharmacology in Zurich, and at another, traveled to misty vineyards as an itinerant wine taster. We find him next engaging in petty subversive activities - printing peevish pamphlets, acting as messenger for obscure syndicalist groups, organizing strikes at glass factories, and that sort of thing. Sometime in the forties he came to Zembla as a brandy salesman. There he married a publican's daughter. His connection with the Extremist party dates from its first ugly writhings, and when the revolution broke out, his modest organizational gifts found some appreciation in various offices. His departure for Western Europe, with a sordid purpose in his heart and a loaded gun in his pocket, took place on the very day that an innocent poet in an innocent land was beginning Canto Two of Pale Fire. We shall accompany Gradus in constant thought, as he makes his way from distant dim Zembla to green Appalachia, through the entire length of the poem, following the road of its rhythm, riding past in a rhyme, skidding around the corner of a run-on, breathing with the caesura, swinging down to the foot of the page from line to line as from branch to branch, hiding between two words (see note to line 596), reappearing on the horizon of a new canto, steadily marching nearer in iambic motion, crossing streets, moving up with his valise on the escalator of the pentameter, stepping off, boarding a new train of thought, entering the hall of a hotel, putting out the bedlight, while Shade blots out a word, and falling asleep as the poet lays down his pen for the night.



Line 27: Sherlock Holmes

A hawk-nosed, lanky, rather likable private detective, the main character in various stories by Conan Doyle. I have no means to ascertain at the present time which of these is referred to here but suspect that our poet simply made up this Case of the Reversed Footprints.



Lines 34-35: Stilettos of a frozen stillicide

How persistently our poet evokes images of winter in the beginning of a poem which he started composing on a balmy summer night! The mechanism of the associations is easy to make out (glass leading to crystal and crystal to ice) but the prompter behind it retains his incognito. One is too modest to suppose that the fact that the poet and his future commentator first met on a winter day somehow impinges here on the actual season. In the lovely line heading this comment the reader should note the last word. My dictionary defines it as "a succession of drops falling from the eaves, eavesdrop, cavesdrop." I remember having encountered it for the first time in a poem by Thomas Hardy. The bright frost has eternalized the bright eavesdrop. We should, also note the cloak-and-dagger hint-glint in the "svelte stilettos" and the shadow of regicide in the rhyme.
	
	
Lines 39-40: Was close my eyes, etc.

	These lines are represented in the drafts by a variant reading: 

39 	........... and home would haste my thieves 
40	The sun with stolen ice, the moon with leaves 
	
	One cannot help recalling a passage in Timon of Athens (Act IV, Scene 3) where the misanthrope talks to the three marauders. Having no library in the desolate log cabin where I live like Timon in his cave, I am compelled for the purpose of quick citation to retranslate this passage into English prose from a Zemblan poetical version of Timon which, I hope, sufficiently approximates the text, or is at least faithful to its spirit: 
	
		The sun is a thief: she lures the sea and robs it. 
		The moon is a thief: he steals his silvery light from the sun. 
		The sea is a thief: it dissolves the moon.
	
	For a prudent appraisal of Conmal's translations of Shakespeare's works, see note to line 962.



Line 42: I could make out

By the end of May I could make out the outlines of some of my images in the shape his genius might give them; by mid-June I felt sure at last that he would recreate in a poem the dazzling Zembla burning in my brain. I mesmerized him with it, I saturated him with my vision, I pressed upon him, with a drunkard's wild generosity, all that I was helpless myself to put into verse. Surely, it would not be easy to discover in the history of poetry a similar case - that of two men, different in origin, upbringing, thought associations, spiritual intonation and mental mode, one a cosmopolitan scholar, the other a fireside poet, entering into a secret compact of this kind. At length I knew he was ripe with my Zembla, bursting with suitable rhymes, ready to spurt at the brush of an eyelash. I kept urging him at every opportunity to surmount his habitual sloth and start writing. My little pocket diary contains such jottings as: "Suggested to him the heroic measure"; "retold the escape"; "offered the use of a quiet room in my house"; "discussed making recordings of my voice for his use"; and finally, under date of July 3: "poem begun!"
	Although I realize only too clearly, alas, that the result, in its pale and diaphanous final phase, cannot be regarded as a direct echo of my narrative (of which, incidentally, only a few fragments are given in my notes - mainly to Canto One), one can hardly doubt that the sunset glow of the story acted as a catalytic agent upon the very process of the sustained creative effervescence that enabled Shade to produce a 1000-line poem in three weeks. There is, moreover, a symptomatic family resemblance in the coloration of both poem and story. I have reread, not without pleasure, my comments to his lines, and in many cases have caught myself borrowing a kind of opalescent light from my poet's fiery orb, and unconsciously aping the prose style of his own critical essays. But his widow, and his colleagues, may stop worrying and enjoy in full the fruit of whatever advice they gave my good-natured poet. Oh yes, the final text of the poem is entirely his.
	If we discount, as I think we should, three casual allusions to royalty (605, 822, and 894) and the Popian "Zembla" in line 937, we may conclude that the final text of Pale Fire has been deliberately and drastically drained of every trace of the material I contributed; but we also find that despite the control exercised upon my poet by a domestic censor and God knows whom else, he has given the royal fugitive a refuge in the vaults of the variants he has preserved; for in his draft as many as thirteen verses, superb singing verses (given by me in note to lines 70, 79, and 130, all in Canto One, which he obviously worked at with a greater degree of creative freedom than he enjoyed afterwards) bear the specific imprint of my theme, a minute but genuine star ghost of my discourse on Zembla and her unfortunate king.

	
Lines 47-48: the frame house between Goldsworth and Wordsmith 

	The first name refers to the house in Dulwich Road that I rented from Hugh Warren Goldsworth, authority on Roman Law and distinguished judge. I never had the pleasure of meeting my landlord but I came to know his handwriting almost as well as I do Shade's. The second name denotes, of course, Wordsmith University. In seeming to suggest a midway situation between the two places, our poet is less concerned with spatial exactitude than with a witty exchange of syllables invoking the two masters of the heroic couplet, between whom he embowers his own muse. Actually, the "frame house on its square of green" was five miles west of the Wordsmith campus but only fifty yards or so distant from my east windows.
	In the Foreword to this work I have had occasion to say something about the amenities of my habitation. The charming, charmingly vague lady (see note to line 691), who secured it for me, sight unseen, meant well, no doubt, especially since it was widely admired in the neighborhood for its "old-world spaciousness and graciousness." Actually, it was an old, dismal, white-and-black, half-timbered house, of the type termed wodnaggen in my country, with carved gables, drafty bow windows and a so-called "semi-noble" porch, surmounted by a hideous veranda. Judge Goldsworth had a wife, and four daughters. Family photographs met me in the hallway and pursued me from room to room, and although I am sure that Alphina (9), Betty (10), Candida (12), and Dee (14) will soon change from horribly cute little schoolgirls to smart young ladies and superior mothers, I must confess that their pert pictures irritated me to such an extent that finally I gathered them one by one and dumped them all in a closet under the gallows row of their cellophane-shrouded winter clothes. In the study I found a large picture of their parents, with sexes reversed, Mrs. G. resembling Malenkov, and Mr. G. a Medusa-locked hag, and this I replaced by the reproduction of a beloved early Picasso: earth boy leading raincloud horse. I did not bother, though, to do much about the family books which were also all over the house - four sets of different Children's Encyclopedias, and a stolid grown-up one that ascended all the way from shelf to shelf along a flight of stairs to burst an appendix in the attic. Judging by the novels in Mrs. Goldsworth's boudoir, her intellectual interests were fully developed, going as they did from Amber to Zen. The head of this alphabetic family had a library too, but this consisted mainly of legal works and a lot of conspicuously lettered ledgers. All the layman could glean for instruction and entertainment was a morocco-bound album in which the judge had lovingly pasted the life histories and pictures of people he had sent to prison or condemned to death: unforgettable faces of imbecile hoodlums, last smokes and last grins, a strangler's quite ordinary-looking hands, a self-made widow, the close-set merciless eyes of a homicidal maniac (somewhat resembling, I admit, the late Jacques d'Argus), a bright little parricide aged seven ("Now, sonny, we want you to tell us -"), and a sad pudgy old pederast who had blown up his blackmailer. What rather surprised me was that he, my learned landlord, and not his "missus," directed the household. Not only had he left me a detailed inventory of all such articles as cluster around a new tenant like a mob of menacing natives, but he had taken stupendous pains to write out on slips of paper recommendations, explanations, injunctions and supplementary lists. Whatever I touched on the first day of my stay yielded a specimen of Goldsworthiana. I unlocked the medicine chest in the second bathroom, and out fluttered a message advising me that the slit for discarded safety blades was too full to use. I opened the icebox, and it warned me with a bark that "no national specialties with odors hard to get rid of" should be placed therein. I pulled out the middle drawer of the desk in the study - and discovered a catalogue raisonné of its meager contents which included an assortment of ashtrays, a damask paperknife (described as "one ancient dagger brought by Mrs. Goldsworth's father from the Orient"), and an old but unused pocket diary optimistically maturing there until its calendric correspondencies came around again. Among various detailed notices affixed to a special board in the pantry, such as plumbing instructions, dissertations on electricity, discourses on cactuses and so forth, I found the diet of the black cat that came with the house: Mon, Wed, Fri: Liver Tue, Thu, Sat: Fish Sun: Ground meat (All it got from me was milk and sardines; it was a likable little creature but after a while its movements began to grate on my nerves and I farmed it out to Mrs. Finley, the cleaning woman.) But perhaps the funniest note concerned the manipulations of the window curtains which had to be drawn in different ways at different hours to prevent the sun from getting at the upholstery. A description of the position of the sun, daily and seasonal, was given for the several windows, and if I had heeded all this I would have been kept as busy as a participant in a regatta. A footnote, however, generously suggested that instead of manning the curtains, I might prefer to shift and reshift out of sun range the more precious pieces of furniture (two embroidered armchairs and a heavy "royal console") but should do it carefully lest I scratch the wall moldings. I cannot, alas, reproduce the meticulous schedule of these transposals but seem to recall that I was supposed to castle the long way before going to bed and the short way first thing in the morning. My dear Shade roared with laughter when I led him on a tour of inspection and had him find some of those bunny eggs for himself. Thank God, his robust hilarity dissipated the atmosphere of damnum infectum in which I was supposed to dwell. On his part, he regaled me with a number of anecdotes concerning the judge's dry wit and courtroom mannerisms; most of these anecdotes were doubtless folklore exaggerations, a few were evident inventions, and all were harmless. He did not bring up, my sweet old friend never did, ridiculous stories about the terrifying shadows that Judge Goldsworth's gown threw across the underworld, or about this or that beast lying in prison and positively dying of raghdirst (thirst for revenge) - crass banalities circulated by the scurrilous and the heartless - by all those for whom romance, remoteness, sealskin-lined scarlet skies, the darkening dunes of a fabulous kingdom, simply do not exist. But enough of this. Let us turn to our poet's windows. I have no desire to twist and batter an unambiguous apparatus criticus into the monstrous semblance of a novel.
	Today it would be impossible for me to describe Shade's house in terms of architecture or indeed in any terms other than those of peeps and glimpses, and window-framed opportunities. As previously mentioned (see Foreword), the coming of summer presented a problem in optics: the encroaching foliage did not always see eye to eye with me: it confused a green monocle with an opaque occludent, and the idea of protection with that of obstruction. Meanwhile (on July 3 according to my agenda) I had learned - not from John but from Sybil - that my friend had started to work on a long poem. After not having seen him for a couple of days, I happened to be bringing him some third-class mail from his box on the road, adjacent to Goldsworth's (which I used to ignore, crammed as it was with leaflets, local advertisements, commercial catalogues, and that kind of trash) and ran into Sybil whom a shrub had screened from my falcon eye. Straw-hatted and garden-gloved, she was squatting on her hams in front of a flower bed and pruning or tying up something, and her close-fitting brown trousers reminded me of the mandolin tights (as I jokingly called them) that my own wife used to wear. She said not to bother him with those ads and added the information about his having "begun a really big poem." I felt the blood rush to my face and mumbled something about his not having shown any of it to me yet, and she straightened herself, and swept the black and gray hair off her forehead, and stared at me, and said: "What do you mean -shown any of it? He never shows anything unfinished. Never, never. He will not even discuss it with you until it is quite, quite finished." I could not believe it, but soon discovered on talking to my strangely reticent friend that he had been well coached by his lady. When I endeavored to draw him out by means of good-natured sallies such as: "People who live in glass houses should not write poems," he would only yawn and shake his head, and retort that "foreigners ought to keep away from old saws." Nevertheless the urge to find out what he was doing with all the live, glamorous, palpitating, shimmering material I had lavished upon him, the itching desire to see him at work (even if the fruit of his work was denied me), proved to be utterly agonizing and uncontrollable and led me to indulge in an orgy of spying which no considerations of pride could stop.
	Windows, as well known, have been the solace of first-person literature throughout the ages. But this observer never could emulate in sheer luck the eavesdropping Hero of Our Time or the omnipresent one of Time Lost, Yet I was granted now and then scraps of happy hunting. When my casement window ceased to function because of an elm's gross growth, I found, at the end of the veranda, an ivied corner from which I could view rather amply the front of the poet's house. If I wanted to see its south side I could go down to the back of my garage and look from behind a tulip tree across the curving downhill road at several precious bright windows, for he never pulled down the shades (she did). If I yearned for the opposite side, all I had to do was walk uphill to the top of my garden where my bodyguard of black junipers watched the stars, and the omens, and the patch of pale light under the lone streetlamp on the road below. By the onset of the season here conjured up, I had surmounted the very special and very private fears that are discussed elsewhere (see note to line 62) and rather enjoyed following in the dark a weedy and rocky easterly projection of my grounds ending in a locust grove on a slightly higher level than the north side of the poet's house.
	Once, three decades ago, in my tender and terrible boyhood, I had the occasion of seeing a man in the act of making contact with God. I had wandered into the so-called Rose Court at the back of the Ducal Chapel in my native Onhava, during an interval in hymnal practice. As I mooned there, lifting and cooling my bare calves by turns against a smooth column, I could hear the distant sweet voices interblending in subdued boyish merriment which some chance grudge, some jealous annoyance with one particular lad, prevented me from joining. The sound of rapid steps made me raise my morose gaze from the sectile mosaic of the court - realistic rose petals cut out of rodstein and large, almost palpable thorns cut out of green marble. Into these roses and thorns there walked a black shadow: a tall, pale, long-nosed dark-haired young minister whom I had seen around once or twice strode out of the vestry and without seeing me stopped in the middle of the court. Guilty disgust contorted his thin lips. He wore spectacles. His chenched hands seemed to be gripping invisible prison bars. But there is no bound to the measure of grace which man may be able to receive. All at once his look changed to one of rapture and reverence. I had never seen such a blaze of bliss before but was to perceive something of that splendor, of that spiritual energy and divine vision, now, in another land, reflected upon the rugged and homely face of old John Shade. How glad I was that the vigils I had kept all through the spring had prepared me to observe him at his miraculous midsummer task! I had learned exactly when and where to find the best points from which to follow the contours of his inspiration. My binoculars would seek him out and focus upon him from afar in his various places of labor: at night, in the violet glow of his upstairs study where a kindly mirror reflected for me his hunched-up shoulders and the pencil with which he kept picking his ear (inspecting now and then the lead, and even tasting it); in the forenoon, lurking in the ruptured shadows of his first-floor study where a bright goblet of liquor quietly traveled from filing cabinet to lectern, and from lectern to bookshelf, there to hide if need be behind Dante's bust; on a hot day, among the vines of a small arborlike portico, through the garlands of which I could glimpse a stretch of oilcloth, his elbow upon it, and the plump cherubic fist propping and crimpling his temple. Incidents of perspective and lighting, interference by framework or leaves, usually deprived me of a clear view of his face; and perhaps nature arranged it that way so as to conceal from a possible predator the mysteries of generation; but sometimes when the poet paced back and forth across his lawn, or sat down for a moment on the bench at the end of it, or paused under his favorite hickory tree, I could distinguish the expression of passionate interest, rapture and reverence, with which he followed the images wording themselves in his mind, and I knew that whatever my agnostic friend might say in denial, at that moment Our Lord was with him.
	On certain nights, when long before its inhabitants' usual bedtime the house would be dark on the three sides I could survey from my three vantage points, that very darkness kept telling me they were at home. Their car stood near its garage - but I could not believe they had gone out on foot, since in that case they would have left the porch light turned on. Later considerations and deductions have persuaded me that the night of great need on which I decided to check the matter was July 11, the date of Shade's completing his Second Canto. It was a hot, black, blustery night. I stole through the shrubbery to the rear of their house. At first I thought that this fourth side was also dark, thus clinching the matter, and had time to experience a queer sense of relief before noticing a faint square of light under the window of a little back parlor where I had never been. It was wide open. A tall lamp with a parchment-like shade illuminated the bottom of the room where I could see Sybil and John, her on the edge of a divan, sidesaddle, with her back to me, and him on a hassock near the divan upon which he seemed to be slowly collecting and stacking scattered playing cards left after a game of patience. Sybil was alternatively huddle-shaking and blowing her nose; John's face was all blotchy and wet. Not being aware at the time of the exact type of writing paper my friend used, I could not help wondering what on earth could be so tear-provoking about the outcome of a game of cards. As I strained to see better, standing up to my knees in a horribly elastic box hedge, I dislodged the sonorous lid of a garbage can. This of course might have been mistaken for the work of the wind, and Sybil hated the wind. She at once left her perch, closed the window with a great bang, and pulled down its strident blind.
	I crept back to my cheerless domicile with a heavy heart and a puzzled mind. The heart remained heavy but the puzzle was solved a few days later, very probably on St. Swithin's Day, for I find in my little diary under that date the anticipatory "promnad vespers mid J. S.," crossed out with a petulance that broke the lead in midstroke. Having waited and waited for my friend to join me in the lane, until the red of the sunset had turned to the ashes of dusk, I walked over to his front door, hesitated, assessed the gloom and the silence, and started to walk around the house. This time not a glint came from the back parlor, but by the bright prosaic light in the kitchen I distinguished one end of a whitewashed table and Sybil sitting at it with so rapt a look on her face that one might have supposed she had just thought up a new recipe. The back door was ajar, and as I tapped it open and launched upon some gay airy phrase, I realized that Shade, sitting at the other end of the table, was in the act of reading to her something that I guessed to be a part of his poem. They both started. An unprintable oath escaped from him and he slapped down on the table the stack of index cards he had in his hand. Later he was to attribute this temperamental outburst to his having mistaken, with his reading glasses on, a welcome friend for an intruding salesman; but I must say it shocked me, it shocked me greatly, and disposed me at the time to read a hideous meaning into everything that followed. "Well, sit down," said Sybil, "and have some coffee" (victors are generous). I accepted, as I wanted to see if the recitation would be continued in my presence. It was not. "I thought," I said to my friend, "you were coming out with me for a stroll." He excused himself saying he felt out of sorts, and continued to clean the bowl of his pipe as fiercely as if it were my heart he was hollowing out.
	Not only did I understand then that Shade regularly read to Sybil cumulative parts of his poem but it also dawns upon me now that, just as regularly, she made him tone down or remove from his Fair Copy everything connected with the magnificent Zemblan theme with which I kept furnishing him and which, without knowing much about the growing work, I fondly believed would become the main rich thread in its weave!
	Higher up on the same wooded hill stood, and still stands I trust, Dr. Sutton's old clapboard house and, at the very top, eternity shall not dislodge Professor C.'s ultramodern villa from whose terrace one can glimpse to the south the larger and sadder of the three conjoined lakes called Omega, Ozero, and Zero (Indian names garbled by early settlers in such a way as to accommodate specious derivations and commonplace allusions). On the northern side of the hill Dulwich Road joins the highway leading to Wordsmith University to which I shall devote here only a few words partly because all kinds of descriptive booklets should be available to the reader by writing to the University's Publicity Office, but mainly because I wish to convey, in making this reference to Wordsmith briefer than the notes on the Goldsworth and Shade houses, the fact that the college was considerably farther from them than they were from one another. It is probably the first time that the dull pain of distance is rendered through an effect of style and that a topographical idea finds its verbal expression in a series of foreshortened sentences.
	After winding for about four miles in a general eastern direction through a beautifully sprayed and irrigated residential section with variously graded lawns sloping down on both sides, the highway bifurcates: one branch goes left to New Wye and its expectant airfield; the other continues to the campus. Here are the great mansions of madness, the impeccably planned dormitories - bedlams of jungle music - the magnificent palace of the Administration, the brick walls, the archways, the quadrangles blocked out in velvet green and chrysoprase, Spencer House and its lily pond, the Chapel, New Lecture Hail, the Library, the prisonlike edifice containing our classrooms and offices (to be called from now on Shade Hall), the famous avenue to all the trees mentioned by Shakespeare, a distant droning sound, the hint of a haze, the turquoise dome of the Observatory, wisps and pale plumes of cirrus, and the poplar-curtained Roman-tiered football field, deserted on summer days except for a dreamy-eyed youngster flying - on a long control line in a droning circle - a motor-powered model plane.
	Dear Jesus, do something.



Line 49: shagbark

A hickory. Our poet shared with the English masters the noble knack of transplanting trees into verse with their sap and shade. Many years ago Disa, our King's Queen, whose favorite trees were the jacaranda and the maidenhair, copied out in her album a quatrain from John Shade's collection of short poems Hebe's Cup, which I cannot refrain from quoting here (from a letter I received on April 6, 1959, from southern France): 

	THE SACRED TREE 
	
	The ginkgo leaf, in golden hue, when shed, 
	A muscat grape, 
	Is an old-fashioned butterfly, ill-spread, 
	In shape.
	
	When the new Episcopal church in New Wye (see note to line 549) was built, the bulldozers spared an arc of those sacred trees planted by a landscaper of genius (Repburg) at the end of the so-called Shakespeare Avenue, on the campus. I do not know if it is relevant or not but there is a cat-and-mouse game in the second line, and "tree" in Zemblan is grados.



Line 57: The phantom of my little daughter's swing

After this Shade crossed out lightly the following lines in the draft: 

	The light is good; the reading lamps, long-necked; 
	All doors have keys. Your modern architect 
	Is in collusion with psychoanalysts: 
	When planning parents' bedrooms, he insists 
	On lockless doors so that, when looking back, 
	The future patient of the future quack 
	May find, all set for him, the Primal Scene.



Line 61: TV's huge paperclip

In the otherwise empty, and pretty fatuous, obituary mentioned in my notes to lines 71-72, there happens to be quoted a manuscript poem (received from Sybil Shade) which is said to have been "composed by our poet apparently at the end of June, thus less than a month before our poet's death, thus being the last short piece that our poet wrote."

Here it is: 

	THE SWING

	The setting sun that lights the tips 
	Of TV's giant paperclips 
	Upon the roof; 
	The shadow of the doorknob that 
	At sundown is a baseball bat 
	Upon the door, 
	The cardinal that likes to sit 
	And make chip-wit, chip-wit, chip-wit 
	Upon the tree; 
	The empty little swing that swings 
	Under the tree: these are the things 
	That break my heart.
	
	I leave my poet's reader to decide whether it is likely he would have written this only a few days before he repeated its miniature themes in this part of the poem. I suspect it to be a much earlier effort (it has no year subscript but should be dated soon after his daughter's death) which Shade dug out from among his old papers to see what he could use for Pale Fire (the poem our necrologist does not know).



Line 62: often

Often, almost nightly, throughout the spring of 1959, I had feared for my life. Solitude is the playfield of Satan. I cannot describe the depths of my loneliness and distress. There was naturally my famous neighbor just across the lane, and at one time I took in a dissipated young roomer (who generally came home long after midnight). Yet I wish to stress that cold hard core of loneliness which is not good for a displaced soul. Everybody knows how given to regicide Zemblans are: two Queens, three Kings, and fourteen pretenders died violent deaths, strangled, stabbed, poisoned, and drowned, in the course of only one century (1700-1800). The Goldsworth castle became particularly solitary after that turning point at dusk which resembles so much the nightfall of the mind. Stealthy rustles, the footsteps of yesteryear leaves, an idle breeze, a dog touring the garbage cans - everything sounded to me like a bloodthirsty prowler. I kept moving from window to window, my silk nightcap drenched with sweat, my bared breast a thawing pond, and sometimes, armed with the judge's shotgun, I dared beard the terrors of the terrace. I suppose it was then, on those masquerading spring nights with the sounds of new life in the trees cruelly mimicking the cracklings of old death in my brain, I suppose it was then, on those dreadful nights, that I got used to consulting the windows of my neighbor's house in the hope for a gleam of comfort (see notes to lines 47-48). What would I not have given for the poet's suffering another heart attack (see line 691 and note) leading to my being called over to their house, all windows ablaze, in the middle of the night, in a great warm burst of sympathy, coffee, telephone calls, Zemblan herbal receipts (they work wonders!), and a resurrected Shade weeping in my arms ("There, there, John"). But on those March nights their house was as black as a coffin. And when physical exhaustion and the sepulchral cold drove me at last upstairs to my solitary double bed, I would lie awake and breathless - as if only now living consciously through those perilous nights in my country, where at any moment, a company of jittery revolutionists might enter and hustle me off to a moonlit wall. The sound of a rapid car or a groaning truck would come as a strange mixture of friendly life's relief and death's fearful shadow: would that shadow pull up at my door? Were those phantom thugs coming for me? Would they shoot me at once - or would they smuggle the chloroformed scholar back to Zembla, Rodnaya Zembla, to face there a dazzling decanter and a row of judges exulting in their inquisitorial chairs?
	At times I thought that only by self-destruction could I hope to cheat the relentlessly advancing assassins who were in me, in my eardrums, in my pulse, in my skull, rather than on that constant highway looping up over me and around my heart as I dozed off only to have my sleep shattered by that drunken, impossible, unforgettable Bob's return to Candida's or Dee's former bed. As briefly mentioned in the foreword, I finally threw him out; after which for several nights neither wine, nor music, nor prayer could allay my fears. On the other hand, those mellowing spring days were quite sufferable, my lectures pleased everybody, and I made a point of attending all the social functions available to me. But after the gay evening there came again the insidious approach, the oblique shuffle, that creeping up, and that pause, and the resumed crepitation.
	The Goldsworth château had many outside doors, and no matter how thoroughly I inspected them and the window shutters downstairs at bedtime, I never failed to discover next morning something unlocked, unlatched, a little loose, a little ajar, something sly and suspicious-looking. One night the black cat, which a few minutes before I had seen rippling down into the basement where I had arranged toilet facilities for it in an attractive setting, suddenly reappeared on the threshold of the music room, in the middle of my insomnia and a Wagner record, arching its back and sporting a neck bow of white silk which it could certainly never have put on all by itself. I telephoned 11111 and a few minutes later was discussing possible culprits with a policeman who relished greatly my cherry cordial, but whoever had broken in had left no trace. It is so easy for a cruel person to make the victim of his ingenuity believe that he has persecution mania, or is really being stalked by a killer, or is suffering from hallucinations. Hallucinations! Well did I know that among certain youthful instructors whose advances I had rejected there was at least one evil practical joker; I knew it ever since the time I came home from a very enjoyable and successful meeting of students and teachers (at which I had exuberantly thrown off my coat and shown several willing pupils a few of the amusing holds employed by Zemblan wrestlers) and found in my coat pocket a brutal anonymous note saying: "You have hal..... s real bad, chum," meaning evidently "hallucinations," although a malevolent critic might infer from the insufficient number of dashes that little Mr. Anon, despite teaching Freshman English, could hardly spell.
	I am happy to report that soon after Easter my fears disappeared never to return. Into Alphina's or Betty's room another lodger moved, Balthasar, Prince of Loam, as I dubbed him, who with elemental regularity fell asleep at nine and by six in the morning was planting heliotropes (Heliotropium turgenevi). This is the flower whose odor evokes with timeless intensity the dusk, and the garden bench, and a house of painted wood in a distant northern land.



Line 70: The new TV

After this, in the draft (dated July 3), come a few unnumbered lines that may have been intended for some later parts of the poem. They are not actually deleted but are accompaied by a question mark in the margin and encircled with a wavy line encroaching upon some of the letters: 

	There are events, strange happenings, that strike 
	The mind as emblematic. They are like 
	Lost similes adrift without a string, 
	Attached to nothing. Thus that northern king, 
	Whose desperate escape from prison was 
	Brought off successfully only because 
	Some forty of his followers that night 
	Impersonated him and aped his flight - 
	
	He never would have reached the western coast had not a fad spread among his secret supporters, romantic, heroic daredevils, of impersonating the fleeing king. They rigged themselves out to look like him in red sweaters and red caps, and popped up here and there, completely bewildering the revolutionary police. Some of the pranksters were much younger than the King, but this did not matter since his pictures in the huts of mountain folks and in the myopic shops of hamlets, where you could buy worms, ginger bread and zhiletka blades, had not aged since his coronation. A charming cartoon touch was added on the famous occasion when from the terrace of the Kronblik Hotel, whose chairlift takes tourists to the Kron glacier, one merry mime was seen floating up, like a red moth, with a hapless, and capless, policeman riding two seats behind him in dream-slow pursuit. It gives one pleasure to add that before reaching the staging point, the false king managed to escape by climbing down one of the pylons that supported the traction cable (see also notes to lines 149 and 171).



Line 71: parents

With commendable alacrity, Professor Hurley produced an Appreciation of John Shade's published works within a month after the poet's death. It came out in a skimpy literary review, whose name momentarily escapes me, and was shown to me in Chicago where I interrupted for a couple of days my automobile journey from New Wye to Cedarn, in these grim autumnal mountains.
	A Commentary where placid scholarship should reign is not the place for blasting the preposterous defects of that little obituary. I have only mentioned it because that is where I gleaned a few meager details concerning the poet's parents. His father, Samuel Shade, who died at fifty, in 1902, had studied medicine in his youth and was vice-president of a firm of surgical instruments in Exton. His chief passion, however, was what our eloquent necrologist calls "the study of the feathered tribe," adding that "a bird had been named for him: Bombycilla Shadei" (this should be "shadei," of course). The poet's mother, née Caroline Lukin, assisted him in his work and drew the admirable figures of his Birds of Mexico, which I remember having seen in my friend's house. What the obituarist does not know is that Lukin comes from Luke, as also do Locock and Luxon and Lukashevich. It represents one of the many instances when the amorphous-looking but live and personal hereditary patronymic grows, sometimes in fantastic shapes, around the common pebble of a Christian name. The Lukins are an old Essex family. Other names derive from professions such as Rymer, Scrivener, Linner (one who illuminates parchments), Botkin (one who makes bottekins, fancy footwear) and thousands of others. My tutor, a Scotsman, used to call any old tumble-down building "a hurley-house." But enough of this.
	A few other items concerning John Shade's university studies and the middle years of his singularly uneventful life can be looked up by his reader in the professor's article. It would have been on the whole a dull piece had it not been enlivened, if that is the term, by certain special features. Thus, there is only one allusion to my friend's masterpiece (the neatly stacked batches of which, as I write this, lie in the sun on my table as so many ingots of fabulous metal) and this I transcribe with morbid delight: "Just before our poet's untimely death he seems to have been working on an autobiographical poem." The circumstances of this death are completely distorted by the professor, a fateful follower of the gentlemen of the daily press who - perhaps for political reasons - had falsified the culprit's motives and intentions without awaiting his trial - which unfortunately was not to take place in this world (see eventually my ultimate note). But, of course, the most striking characteristic of the little obituary is that it contains not one reference to the glorious friendship that brightened the last months of John's life.
	My friend could not evoke the image of his father. Similarly, the King, who also was not quite three when his father, King Alfin, died, was unable to recall his face, although oddly he did remember perfectly well the little monoplane of chocolate that he, a chubby babe, happened to be holding in that very last photograph (Christmas 1918) of the melancholy, riding-breeched aviator in whose lap he reluctantly and uncomfortably sprawled.
	Alfin the Vague (1873-1918; regnal dates 1900-1918, but 1900-1919 in most biographical dictionaries, a fumble due to the coincident calendar change from Old Style to New) was given his cognomen by Amphitheatricus, a not unkindly writer of fugitive poetry in the liberal gazettes (who was also responsible for dubbing my capital Uranograd!). King Alfin's absent-mindedness knew no bounds. He was a wretched linguist, having at his disposal only a few phrases of French and Danish, but every time he had to make a speech to his subjects - to a group of gaping Zemblan yokels in some remote valley where he had crash-landed - some uncontrollable switch went into action in his mind, and he reverted to those phrases, flavoring them for topical sense with a little Latin. Most of the anecdotes relating to his naïve fits of abstraction are too silly and indecent to sully these pages; but one of them that I do not think especially funny induced such guffaws from Shade (and returned to me, via the Common Room, with such obscene accretions) that I feel inclined to give it here as a sample (and as a corrective). One summer before the first world war, when the emperor of a great foreign realm (I realize how few there are to choose from) was paying an extremely unusual and flattering visit to our little hard country, my father took him and a young Zemblan interpreter (whose sex I leave open) in a newly purchased custom-built car on a jaunt in the countryside. As usual, King Alfin traveled without a vestige of escort, and this, and his brisk driving, seemed to trouble his guest. On their way back, some twenty miles from Onhava, King Alfin decided to stop for repairs. While he tinkered with the motor, the emperor and the interpreter sought the shade of some pines by the highway, and only when King Alfin was back in Onhava, did he gradually realize from a reiteration of rather frantic questions that he had left somebody behind ("What emperor?" has remained his only memorable mot). Generally speaking, in respect of any of my contributions (or what I thought to be contributions) I repeatedly enjoined my poet to record them in writing, by all means, but not to spread them in idle speech; even poets, however, are human.
	King's Alfin's absent-mindedness was strangely combined with a passion for mechanical things, especially for flying apparatuses. In 1912, he managed to rise in an umbrella-like Fabre "hydroplane" and almost got drowned in the sea between Nitra and Indra. He smashed two Farmans, three Zemblan machines, and a beloved Santos Dumont Demoiselle. A very special monoplane, Blenda IV, was built for him in 1916 by his constant "aerial adjutant" Colonel Peter Gusev (later a pioneer parachutist and, at seventy, one of the greatest jumpers of all time), and this was his bird of doom. On the serene, and not too cold, December morning that the angels chose to net his mild pure soul, King Alfin was in the act of trying solo a tricky vertical loop that Prince Andrey Kachurin, the famous Russian stunter and War One hero, had shown him in Gatchina. Something went wrong, and the little Blenda was seen to go into an uncontrolled dive. Behind and above him, in a Caudron biplane, Colonel Gusev (by then Duke of Rahl) and the Queen snapped several pictures of what seemed at first a noble and graceful evolution but then turned into something else. At the last moment, King Alfin managed to straighten out his machine and was again master of gravity when, immediately afterwards, he flew smack into the scaffolding of a huge hotel which was being constructed in the middle of a coastal heath as if for the special purpose of standing in a king's way. This uncompleted and badly gutted building was ordered razed by Queen Blenda who had it replaced by a tasteless monument of granite surmounted by an improbable type of aircraft made of bronze. The glossy prints of the enlarged photographs depicting the entire catastrophe were discovered one day by eight-year-old Charles Xavier in the drawer of a secretary bookcase. In some of these ghastly pictures one could make out the shoulders and leathern casque of the strangely unconcerned aviator, and in the penultimate one of the series, just before the white-blurred shattering crash, one distinctly saw him raise one arm in triumph, and reassurance. The boy had hideous dreams after that but his mother never found out that he had seen those infernal records.
	Her he remembered - more or less: a horsewoman, tall, broad, stout, ruddy-faced. She had been assured by a royal cousin that her son would be safe and happy under the tutelage of admirable Mr. Campbell who had taught several dutiful little princesses to spread butterflies and enjoy Lord Ronald's Coronach. He had immolated his life, so to speak, at the portable altars of a vast number of hobbies, from the study of book mites to bear hunting, and could reel off Macbeth from beginning to end during hikes; but he did not give a damn for his charges' morals, preferred ladies to laddies, and did not meddle in the complexities of Zemblan ingledom. He left, for some exotic court, after a ten-year stay, in 1932 when our Prince, aged seventeen, had begun dividing his time between the University and his regiment. It was the nicest period in his life. He never could decide what he enjoyed more: the study of poetry - especially English poetry - or attending parades, or dancing in masquerades with boy-girls and girl-boys. His mother died suddenly on July 21, 1936, from an obscure blood ailment that had also afflicted her mother and grandmother. She had been much better on the day before - and Charles Xavier had gone to an all-night ball in the so-called Ducal Dome in Grindelwood: for the nonce, a formal heterosexual affair, rather refreshing after some previous sport. At about four in the morning, with the sun enflaming the tree crests and Mt. Falk, a pink cone, the King stopped his powerful car at one of the gates of the palace. The air was so delicate, the light so lyrical, that he and the three friends he had with him decided to walk through the linden bosquet the rest of the distance to the Pavonian Pavilion where guests were lodged. He and Otar, a platonic pal, wore tails but they had lost their top hats to the highway winds. A strange something struck all four of them as they stood under the young limes in the prim landscape of scarp and counterscarp fortified by shadow and countershadow. Otar, a pleasant and cultured adeling with a tremendous nose and sparse hair, had his two mistresses with him, eighteen-year-old Fifalda (whom he later married) and seventeen-year-old Fleur (whom we shall meet in two other notes), daughters of Countess de Fyler, the Queen's favorite lady in waiting. One involuntarily lingers over that picture, as one does when standing at a vantage point of time and knowing in retrospect that in a moment one's life would undergo a complete change. So here was Otar, looking with a puzzled expression at the distant window's of the Queen's quarters, and there were the two girls, side by side, thin-legged, in shimmering wraps, their kitten noses pink, their eyes green and sleepy, their earrings catching and loosing the fire of the sun. There were a few people around, as there always were, no matter the hour, at this gate, along which a road, connecting with the eastern highway, ran. A peasant woman with a small cake she had baked, doubtlessly the mother of the sentinel who had not yet come to relieve the unshaven dark young nattdett (child of night) in his dreary sentry box, sat on a spur stone watching in feminine fascination the luciola-like tapers that moved from window to window; two workmen, holding their bicycles, stood staring too at those strange lights; and a drunk with a walrus mustache kept staggering around and patting the trunks of the lindens. One picks up minor items at such slowdowns of life. The King noticed that some reddish mud flecked the frames of the two bicycles and that their front wheels were both turned in the same direction, parallel to one another. Suddenly, down a steep path among the lilac bushes - a short cut from the Queen's quarters - the Countess came running and tripping over the hem of her quilted robe, and at the same moment, from another side of the palace, all seven councilors, dressed in their formal splendor and carrying like plum cakes replicas of various regalia, came striding down the stairs of stone, in dignified haste, but she beat them by one alin and spat out the news. The drunk started to sing a ribald ballad about "Karlie-Garlie" and fell into the demilune ditch. It is not easy to describe lucidly in short notes to a poem the various approaches to a fortified castle, and so, in my awareness of this problem, I prepared for John Shade, some time in June, when narrating to him the events briefly noticed in some of my comments (see note to line 130, for example), a rather handsomely drawn plan of the chambers, terraces, bastions and pleasure grounds of the Onhava Palace. Unless it has been destroyed or stolen, this careful picture in colored inks on a large (thirty by twenty inches) piece of cardboard might still be where I last saw it in mid-July, on the top of the big black trunk, opposite the old mangle, in a niche of the little corridor leading to the so-called fruit room. If it is not there, it might be looked for in his upper-floor study. I have written about this to Mrs. Shade but she does not reply to my letters. In case it still exists, I wish to beg her, without raising my voice, and very humbly, as humbly as the lowliest of the King's subjects might plead for an immediate restitution of his rights (the plan is mine and is clearly signed with a black chess-king crown after "Kinbote"), to send it, well packed, marked not to be bent on the wrapper, and by registered mail, to my publisher for reproduction in later editions of this work. Whatever energy I possessed has quite ebbed away lately, and these excruciating headaches now make impossible the mnemonic effort and eye strain that the drawing of another such plan would demand. The black trunk stands on another brown or brownish even larger one, and there is I think a stuffed fox or coyote next to them in their dark corner.



Line 79: a preterist

Written against this in the margin of the draft are two lines of which only the first can be deciphered. It reads: 

	The evening is the time to praise the day 
	
	I feel pretty sure that my friend was trying to incorporate here something he and Mrs. Shade had heard me quote in my lighter-hearted moments, namely a charming quatrain from our Zemblan counterpart of the Elder Edda, in an anonymous English translation (Kirby's?): 
	
	The wise at nightfall praise the day, 
	The wife when she has passed away, 
	The ice when it is crossed, the bride 
	When tumbled, and the horse when tried.



Line 80: my bedroom

Our Prince was fond of Fleur as of a sister but with no soft shadow of incest or secondary homosexual complications. She had a small pale face with prominent cheekbones, luminous eyes, and curly dark hair. It was rumored that after going about with a porcelain cup and Cinderella's slipper for months, the society sculptor and poet Arnor had found in her what he sought and had used her breasts and feet for his _Lilith Calling Back Adam_; but I am certainly no expert in these tender matters. Otar, her lover, said that when you walked behind her, and she knew you were walking behind her, the swing and play of those slim haunches was something intensely artistic, something Arab girls were taught in special schools by special Parisian panders who were afterwards strangled. Her fragile ankles, he said, which she placed very close together in her dainty and wavy walk, were the "careful jewels" in Arnor's poem about a miragarl ("mirage girl"), for which "a dream king in the sandy wastes of time would give three hundred camels and three fountains."

	On ságaren werém tremkín tri stána
	Verbálala wod gév ut trí phantána

	(I have marked the stress accents).
	
	The Prince did not heed this rather kitschy prattle (all, probably, directed by her mother) and, let it be repeated, regarded her merely as a sibling, fragrant and fashionable, with a painted pout and a maussade, blurry, Gallic way of expressing the little she wished to express. Her unruffled rudeness toward the nervous and garrulous Countess amused him. He liked dancing with her - and only with her. He hardly squirmed at all when she stroked his hand or applied herself soundlessly with open lips to his cheek which the haggard after-the-ball dawn had already sooted. She did not seem to mind when he abandoned her for manlier pleasures; and she met him again in the dark of a car or in the half-glow of a cabaret with the subdued and ambiguous smile of a kissing cousin.
	The forty days between Queen Blenda's death and his coronation was perhaps the most trying stretch of time in his life. He had had no love for his mother, and the hopeless and helpless remorse he now felt degenerated into a sickly physical fear of her phantom. The Countess, who seemed to be near him, to be rustling at his side, all the time, had him attend table-turning seances with an experienced American medium, seances at which the Queen's spirit, operating the same kind of planchette she had used in her lifetime to chat with Thormodus Torfaeus and A. R. Wallace, now briskly wrote in English: "Charles take take cherish love flower flower flower." An old psychiatrist so thoroughly bribed by the Countess as to look, even on the outside, like a putrid pear, assured him that his vices had subconsciously killed his mother and would continue "to kill her in him" if he did not renounce sodomy. A palace intrigue is a special spider that entangles you more nastily at every desperate jerk you try. Our Prince was young, inexperienced, and half-frenzied with insomnia. He hardly struggled at all. The Countess spent a fortune on buying his kamergrum (groom of the chamber), his bodyguard, and even the greater part of the Court Chamberlain. She took to sleeping in a small antechamber next to his bachelor bedroom, a splendid spacious circular apartment at the top of the high and massive South West Tower. This had been his father's retreat and was still connected by a jolly chute in the wall with a round swimming pool in the hall below, so that the young Prince could start the day as his father used to start it by slipping open a panel beside his army cot and rolling into the shaft whence he whizzed down straight into bright water. For other needs than sleep Charles Xavier had installed in the middle of the Persian rug-covered floor a so-called patifolia, that is, a huge, oval, luxuriously flounced, swansdown pillow the size of a triple bed. It was in this ample nest that Fleur now slept, curled up in its central hollow, under a coverlet of genuine giant panda fur that had just been rushed from Tibet by a group of Asiatic well-wishers on the occasion of his ascension to the throne. The antechamber, where the Countess was ensconced, had its own inner staircase and bathroom, but also communicated by means of a sliding door with the West Gallery. I do not know what advice or command her mother had given Fleur; but the little thing proved a poor seducer. She kept trying, as one quietly insane, to mend a broken viola d'amore or sat in dolorous attitudes comparing two ancient flutes, both sad-tuned and feeble. Meantime, in Turkish garb, he lolled in his father's ample chair, his legs over its arm, flipping through a volume of Historia Zemblica, copying out passages and occasionally fishing out of the nether recesses of his seat a pair of old-fashioned motoring goggles, a black opal ring, a ball of silver chocolate wrapping, or the star of a foreign order.
	It was warm in the evening sun. She wore on the second day of their ridiculous cohabitation nothing except a kind of buttonless and sleeveless pajama top. The sight of her four bare limbs and three mousepits (Zemblan anatomy) irritated him, and while pacing about and pondering his coronation speech, he would toss towards her, without looking, her shorts or a terrycloth robe. Sometimes, upon returning to the comfortable old chair he would find her in it contemplating sorrowfully the picture of a bogtur (ancient warrior) in the history book. He would sweep her out of his chair, his eyes still on his writing pad, and stretching herself she would move over to the window seat and its dusty sunbeam; but after a while she tried to cuddle up to him, and he had to push away her burrowing dark curly head with one hand while writing with the other or detach one by one her little pink claws from his sleeve or sash.
	Her presence at night did not kill insomnia, but at least kept at bay the strong ghost of Queen Blenda. Between exhaustion and drowsiness, he trifled with paltry fancies, such as getting up and pouring out a little cold water from a decanter onto Fleur's naked shoulder so as to extinguish upon it the weak gleam of a moonbeam. Stentoriously the Countess snored in her lair. And beyond the vestibule of his vigil (here he began falling asleep), in the dark cold gallery, lying all over the painted marble and piled three or four deep against the locked door, some dozing, some whimpering, were his new boy pages, a whole mountain of gift boys from Troth, and Tuscany, and Albanoland.
	He awoke to find her standing with a comb in her hand before his - or rather, his grandfather's - cheval glass, a triptych of bottomless light, a really fantastic mirror, signed with a diamond by its maker, Sudarg of Bokay. She turned about before it: a secret device of reflection gathered an infinite number of nudes in its depths, garlands of girls in graceful and sorrowful groups, diminishing in the limpid distance, or breaking into individual nymphs, some of whom, she murmured, must resemble her ancestors when they were young - little peasant garlien combing their hair in shallow water as far as the eye could reach, and then the wistful mermaid from an old tale, and then nothing.
	On the third night a great stomping and ringing of arms came from the inner stairs, and there burst in the Prime Councilor, three Representatives of the People, and the chief of a new bodyguard. Amusingly, it was the Representatives of the People whom the idea of having for queen the granddaughter of a fiddler infuriated the most. That was the end of Charles Xavier's chaste romance with Fleur, who was pretty yet not repellent (as some cats are less repugnant than others to the good-natured dog told to endure the bitter effluvium of an alien genus). With their white suitcases and obsolete musical instruments the two ladies wandered back to the annex of the Palace. There followed a sweet twang of relief - and then the door of the anteroom slid open with a merry crash and the whole heap of putti tumbled in.
	He was to go through a far more dramatic ordeal thirteen years later with Disa, Duchess of Payn, whom he married in 1949, as described in notes to lines 275 and 433-434, which the student of Shade's poem will reach in due time; there is no hurry. A series of cool summers ensued. Poor Fleur was still around, though indistinctly so. Disa befriended her after the old Countess perished in the crowded vestibule of the 1950 Exposition of Glass Animals, when part of it was almost destroyed by fire, Gradus helping the fire brigade to clear a space in the square for the lynching of the non-union incendiaries, or at least of the persons (two baffled tourists from Denmark) who have been mistaken for them. Our young Queen may have felt some subtle sympathy for her pale lady in waiting whom from time to time the King glimpsed illuminating a concert program by the diagonal light of an ogival window, or heard making tinny music in Bower B. The beautiful bedroom of his bachelor days is alluded to again in a note to line 130, as the place of his "luxurious captivity" in the beginning of the tedious and unnecessary Zemblan Revolution.



Line 85: Who'd seen the Pope

Pius X, Giuseppe Melchiorre Sarto, 1835-1914; Pope 1903-1914.



Lines 86-90: Aunt Maud

Maud Shade, 1869-1950, Samuel Shade's sister. At her death, Hazel (born 1934) was not exactly a "babe" as implied in line 90. I found her paintings unpleasant but interesting. Aunt Maud was far from spinsterish, and the extravagant and sardonic turn of her mind must have shocked sometimes the genteel dames of New Wye.
	

Lines 90-93: Her room, etc.

In the draft, instead of the final text: 
	
	............. her room 
	We've kept intact. Her trivia for us 
	Retrace her style: the leaf sarcophagus 
	(A Luna's dead and shriveled-up cocoon)
	
	The reference is to what my dictionary defines as "a large, tailed, pale green moth, the caterpillar of which feeds on the hickory." I suspect Shade altered this passage because his moth's name clashed with "Moon" in the next line.



Line 91: trivia

Among these was a scrapbook in which over a period of years (1937-1949) Aunt Maud had been pasting clippings of an involuntarily ludicrous or grotesque nature. John Shade allowed me one day to memorandum the first and the last of the series; they happened to intercommunicate most pleasingly, I thought. Both stemmed from the same family magazine Life, so justly famed for its pudibundity in regard to the mysteries of the male sex; hence one can well imagine how startled or titillated those families were. The first comes from the issue of May 10, 1937, p. 67, and advertises the Talon Trouser Fastener (a rather grasping and painful name, by the way). It shows a young gent radiating virility among several ecstatic lady-friends, and the inscription reads: You'll be amazed that the fly of your trousers could be so dramatically improved. The second comes from the issue of March 28, 1949, p. 126, and advertises Hanes Fig Leaf Brief. It shows a modern Eve worshipfully peeping from behind a potted tree of knowledge at a leering young Adam in rather ordinary but clean underwear, with the front of his advertised brief conspicuously and compactly shaded, and the inscription reads: Nothing beats a fig leaf.
	I think there must exist a special subversive group of pseudo-cupids - plump hairless little devils whom Satan commissions to make disgusting mischief in sacrosanct places.



Line 92: the paperweight

The image of those old-fashioned horrors strangely haunted our poet. I have clipped from a newspaper that recently reprinted it an old poem of his where the souvenir shop also preserves a landscape admired by the tourist: 

	MOUNTAIN VIEW 
	
	Between the mountain and the eye 
	The spirit of the distance draws 
	A veil of blue amorous gauze, 
	The very texture of the sky. 
	A breeze reaches the pines, and I 
	Join in the general applause. 
	But we all know it cannot last, 
	The mountain is too weak to wait - 
	Even if reproduced and glassed 
	In me as in a paperweight.



Line 98: On Chapman's Homer

A reference to the title of Keats' famous sonnet (often quoted in America) which, owing to a printer's absent-mindedness, has been drolly transposed, from some other article, into the account of a sports event. For other vivid misprints see note to line 802.



Line 101: No free man needs a God

When one considers the numberless thinkers and poets in the history of human creativity whose freedom of mind was enhanced rather than stunted by Faith, one is bound to question the wisdom of this easy aphorism (see also note to line 549).



Line 109: iridule

An iridescent cloudlet, Zemblan muderperlwelk. The term "iridule" is, I believe, Shade's own invention. Above it, in the Fair Copy (card 9, July 4) he has written in pencil. "peacock-herl." The peacock-herl is the body of a certain sort of artificial fly also called "alder." So the owner of this motor court, an ardent fisherman, tells me. (See also the "strange nacreous gleams" in line 634.)



Line 119: Dr. Sutton

This is a recombination of letters taken from two names, one beginning in "Sut," the other ending in "ton." Two distinguished medical men, long retired from practice, dwelt on our hill. Both were very old friends of the Shades; one had a daughter, president of Sybil's club - and this is the Dr. Sutton I visualize in my notes to lines 181 and 1000. He is also mentioned in Line 986.
	
	
Lines 120-121: five minutes were equal to forty ounces, etc.
	
In the left margin and parallel to it: "In the Middle Ages an hour was equal to 480 ounces of fine sand or 22,560 atoms."
	I am unable to check either this statement or the poet's calculations in regard to five minutes, i.e. three hundred seconds, since I do not see how 480 can be divided by 300 or vice versa, but perhaps I am only tired. On the day (July 4) John Shade wrote this, Gradus the Gunman was getting ready to leave Zembla for his steady blunderings through two hemispheres (see note to line 181).



Line 130: I never bounced a ball or swung a bat

Frankly I too never excelled in soccer and cricket: I am a passable horseman, a vigorous though unorthodox skier, a good skater, a tricky wrestler, and an enthusiastic rock-climber.
	Line 130 is followed in the draft by four verses which Shade discarded in favor of the Fair Copy continuation (line 131 etc.). This false start goes: 
	
	As children playing in a castle find 
	In some old closet full of toys, behind 
	The animals and masks, a sliding door 
	[four words heavily crossed out] a secret corridor - 
	
	The comparison has remained suspended. Presumably our poet intended to attach it to the account of his stumbling upon some mysterious truth in the fainting fits of his boyhood. I cannot say how sorry I am that he rejected these lines. I regret it not only because of their intrinsic beauty, which is great, but also because the image they contain was suggested by something Shade had from me. I have already alluded in the course of these notes to the adventures of Charles Xavier, last King of Zembla, and to the keen interest my friend took in the many stories I told him about that king. The index card on which the variant has been preserved is dated July 4 and is a direct echo of our sunset rambles in the fragrant lanes of New Wye and Dulwich. "Tell me more," he would say as he knocked his pipe empty against a beech trunk, and while the colored cloud lingered, and while far away in the lighted house on the hill Mrs. Shade sat quietly enjoying a video drama, I gladly acceded to my friend's request.
	In simple words I described the curious situation in which the King found himself during the first months of the rebellion. He had the amusing feeling of his being the only black piece in what a composer of chess problems might term a king-in-the-corner waiter of the solus rex type. The Royalists, or at least the Moderns (Moderate Democrats), might have still prevented the state from turning into a commonplace modern tyranny, had they been able to cope with the tainted gold and the robot troops that a powerful police state from its vantage ground a few sea miles away was pouring into the Zemblan Revolution. Despite the hopelessness of the situation, the King refused to abdicate. A haughty and morose captive, he was caged in his rose-stone palace from a corner turret of which one could make out with the help of field glasses lithe youths diving into the swimming pool of a fairy tale sport club, and the English ambassador in old-fashioned flannels playing tennis with the Basque coach on a clay court as remote as paradise. How serene were the mountains, how tenderly painted on the western vault of the sky!
	Somewhere in the mist of the city there occurred every day disgusting outbursts of violence, arrests and executions, but the great city roiled on as smoothly as ever, the cafes were full, splendid plays were being performed at the Royal Theater, and it was really the palace which contained the strongest concentrate of gloom. Stone-faced, square-shouldered komizars enforced strict discipline among the troops on duty within and without. Puritan prudence had sealed up the wine cellars and removed all the maidservants from the southern wing. The ladies in waiting had, of course, left long before, at the time the King exiled his Queen to her villa on the French Riviera. Thank heavens, she was spared those dreadful days in the polluted palace!
	The door of every room was guarded. The banqueting hall had three custodians and as many as four loafed in the library whose dark recesses seemed to harbor all the shadows of treason. The bedrooms of the few remaining palace attendants had each its armed parasite, drinking forbidden rum with an old footman or taking liberties with a young page. And in the great Heralds' Hall one could always be sure of finding ribald jokers trying to squeeze into the steel panoply of its hollow knights. And what a smell of leather and goat in the spacious chambers once redolent of carnations and lilacs!
	This tremendous company consisted of two main groups: ignorant, ferocious-looking but really quite harmless conscripts from Thule, and taciturn, very polite Extremists from the famous Glass Factory where the revolution had flickered first. One can now reveal (since he is safe in Paris) that this contingent included at least one heroic royalist so virtuosically disguised that he made his unsuspecting fellow guards look like mediocre imitators. Actually Odon happened to be one of the most prominent actors in Zembla and was winning applause in the Royal Theater on his off-duty nights. Through him the King kept in touch with numerous adherents, young nobles, artists, college athletes, gamblers, Black Rose Paladins, members of fencing clubs, and other men of fashion and adventure. Rumors rumbled. It was said that the captive would soon be tried by a special court; but it was also said that he would be shot while ostensibly being transported to another place of confinement. Although flight was discussed daily, the schemes of the conspirators had more aesthetic than practical value. A powerful motorboat had been prepared in a coastal cave near Blawick (Blue Cove) in western Zembla, beyond the chain of tall mountains which separated the city from the sea; the imagined reflections of the trembling transparent water on the rock wall and boat were tantalizing, but none of the schemers could suggest how the King could escape from his castle and pass safely through its fortifications.
	One August day, at the beginning of his third month of luxurious captivity in the South West Tower, he was accused of using a fop's hand mirror and the sun's cooperative rays to flash signals from his lofty casement. The vastness of the view it commanded was denounced not only as conducive to treachery but as producing in the surveyor an airy sense of superiority over his low-lodged jailers. Accordingly, one evening the King's cot-and-pot were transferred to a dismal lumber room on the same side of the palace but on its first floor. Many years before, it had been the dressing room of his grandfather, Thurgus the Third. After Thurgus died (in 1900) his ornate bedroom was transformed into a kind of chapel and the adjacent chamber, shorn of its full-length multiple mirror and green silk sofa, soon degenerated into what it had now remained for half a century, an old hole of a room with a locked trunk in one corner and an obsolete sewing machine in another. It was reached from a marble-flagged gallery, running along its north side and sharply turning immediately west of it to form a vestibule in the southwest corner of the Palace. The only window gave on an inner court on the south side. This window had once been a glorious dreamway of stained glass, with a fire-bird and a dazzled huntsman, but a football had recently shattered the fabulous forest scene and now its new ordinary pane was barred from the outside. On the west-side wall, above a whitewashed closet door, hung a large photograph in a frame of black velvet. The fleeting and faint but thousands of times repeated action of the same sun that was accused of sending messages from the tower, had gradually patinated this picture which showed the romantic profile and broad bare shoulders of the forgotten actress Iris Acht, said to have been for several years, ending with her sudden death in 1888, the mistress of Thurgus. In the opposite, east-side wall a frivolous-looking door, similar in turquoise coloration to the room's only other one (opening into the gallery) but securely hasped, had once led to the old rake's bedchamber; it had now lost its crystal knob, and was flanked on the east-side wall by two banished engravings belonging to the room's period of decay. They were of the sort that is not really supposed to be looked at, pictures that exist merely as general notions of pictures to meet the humble ornamental needs of some corridor or waiting room: one was a shabby and lugubrious Fête Flammande after Teniers; the other had once hung in the nursery whose sleepy denizens had always taken it to depict foamy waves in the foreground instead of the blurry shapes of melancholy sheep that it now revealed.
	The King sighed and began to undress. His camp bed and a bedtable had been placed, facing the window, in the northeast corner. East was the turquoise door; north, the door of the gallery; west, the door of the closet; south, the window. His black blazer and white trousers were taken away by his former valet's valet. The King sat down on the edge of the bed in his pajamas. The man returned with a pair of morocco bed slippers, pulled them on his master's listless feet, and was off with the discarded pumps. The King's wandering gaze stopped at the casement which was half open. One could see part of the dimly lit court where under an enclosed poplar two soldiers on a stone bench were playing lansquenet. The summer night was starless and stirless, with distant spasms of silent lightning. Around the lantern that stood on the bench a batlike moth blindly flapped - until the punter knocked it down with his cap. The King yawned, and the illumined card players shivered and dissolved in the prism of his tears. His bored glance traveled from wall to wall. The gallery door stood slightly ajar, and one could hear the steps of the guard coming and going. Above the closet, Iris Acht squared her shoulders and looked away. A cricket cricked. The bedside light was just strong enough to put a bright gleam on the gilt key in the lock of the closet door. And all at once that spark on that key caused a wonderful conflagration to spread in the prisoner's mind.
	We shall now go back from mid-August 1958 to a certain afternoon in May three decades earlier when he was a dark strong lad of thirteen with a silver ring on the forefinger of his sun-tanned hand. Queen Blenda, his mother, had recently left for Vienna and Rome. He had several dear playmates but none could compete with Oleg, Duke of Rahl. In those days growing boys of high-born families wore on festive occasions--of which we had so many during our long northern spring--sleeveless jerseys, white anklesocks with black buckle shoes, and very tight, very short shorts called hotinguens. I wish I could provide the reader with cut-out figures and parts of attire as given in paper-doll charts for children armed with scissors. It would brighten a little these dark evenings that are destroying my brain. Both lads were handsome, long-legged specimens of Varangian boyhood. At twelve, Oleg was the best center forward at the Ducal School. When stripped and shiny in the mist of the bath house, his bold virilia contrasted harshly with his girlish grace. He was a regular faunlet. On that particular afternoon a copious shower lacquered the spring foliage of the palace garden, and oh, how the Persian lilacs in riotous bloom tumbled and tossed behind the green-streaming, amethyst-blotched windowpanes! One would have to play indoors. Oleg was late. Would he come at all?
	It occurred to the young Prince to disinter a set of precious toys (the gift of a foreign potentate who had recently been assassinated) which had amused Oleg and him during a previous Easter, and then had been laid aside as happens with those special, artistic playthings which allow their bubble of pleasure to yield all its tang at once before retreating into museum oblivion. What he particularly desired to rediscover now was an elaborate toy circus contained in a box as big as a croquet case. He craved for it; his eyes, his brain, and that in his brain which corresponded to the ball of his thumb, vividly remembered the brown boy acrobats with spangled nates, an elegant and melancholy clown with a ruff, and especially three pup-sized elephants of polished wood with such versatile joints that you could make the sleek jumbo stand upright on one foreleg or rear up solidly on the top of a small white barrel ringed with red. Less than a fortnight had passed since Oleg's last visit, when for the first time the two boys had been allowed to share the same bed, and the tingle of their misbehavior, and the foreglow of another such night, were now mixed in our young Prince with an embarrassment that suggested refuge in earlier, more innocent games.
	His English tutor who, after a picnic in Mandevil Forest, was laid up with a sprained ankle, did not know where that circus might be; he advised looking for it in an old lumber room at the end of the West Gallery. Thither the Prince betook himself. That dusty black trunk? It looked grimly negative. The rain was more audible here owing to the proximity of a prolix gutter pipe. What about the closet? Its gilt key turned reluctantly. All three shelves and the space beneath were stuffed with disparate objects: a palette with the dregs of many sunsets; a cupful of counters; an ivory backscratcher, a thirty-two mo edition of Timon of Athens translated into Zemblan by his uncle Conmal, the Queen's brother; a seaside situla (toy pail); a sixty-five-carat blue diamond accidentally added in his childhood, from his late father's knickknackatory, to the pebbles and shells in that pail; a finger of chalk; and a square board with a design of interlaced figures for some long-forgotten game. He was about to look elsewhere in the closet when on trying to dislodge a piece of black velvet, one corner of which had unaccountably got caught behind the shelf, something gave, the shelf budged, proved removable, and revealed just under its farther edge, in the back of the closet, a keyhole to which the same gilt key was found to fit.
	Impatiently he cleared the other two shelves of all they held (mainly old clothes and shoes), removed them as he had done with the middle one, and unlocked the sliding door at the back of the closet. The elephants were forgotten, he stood on the threshold of a secret passage. Its deep darkness was total but something about its speluncar acoustics foretold, clearing its throat hollowly, great things, and he hurried to his own quarters to fetch a couple of flashlights and a pedometer. As he was returning, Oleg arrived: He carried a tulip. His soft blond locks had been cut since his last visit to the palace, and the young Prince thought: Yes, I knew he would be different. But when Oleg knitted his golden brows and bent close to hear about the discovery, the young Prince knew by the downy warmth of that crimson ear and by the vivacious nod greeting the proposed investigation, that no change had occurred in his dear bedfellow.
	As soon as Monsieur Beauchamp had sat down for a game of chess at the bedside of Mr. Campbell and had offered his raised fists to choose from, the young Prince took Oleg to the magical closet. The wary, silent, green-carpeted steps of an escalier dérobé led to a stone-paved underground passage. Strictly speaking it was "underground" only in brief spells when, after burrowing under the southwest vestibule next to the lumber room, it went under a series of terraces, under the avenue of birches in the royal park, and then under the three transverse streets, Academy Boulevard, Coriolanus Lane and Timon Alley, that still separated it from its final destination. Otherwise, in its angular and cryptic course it adapted itself to the various structures which it followed, here availing itself of a bulwark to fit in its side like a pencil in the pencil hold of a pocket diary, there running through the cellars of a great mansion too rich in dark passageways to notice the stealthy intrusion. Possibly, in the intervening years, certain arcane connections had been established between the abandoned passage and the outer world by the random repercussions of work in surrounding layers of masonry or by the blind pokings of time itself; for here and there magic apertures and penetrations, so narrow and deep as to drive one insane, could be deduced from a pool of sweet, foul ditch water, bespeaking a moat, or from a dusky odor of earth and turf, marking the proximity of a glacis slope overhead; and at one point, where the passage crept through the basement of a huge ducal villa, with hothouses famous for their collections of desert flora, a light spread of sand momentarily changed the sound of one's tread. Oleg walked in front: his shapely buttocks encased in tight indigo cotton moved alertly, and his own erect radiance, rather than his flambeau, seemed to illume with leaps of light the low ceiling and crowding wails. Behind him the young Prince's electric torch played on the ground and gave a coating of flour to the back of Oleg's bare thighs. The air was musty and cold. On and on went the fantastic burrow. It developed a slight ascending grade. The pedometer had tocked off 1,888 yards, when at last they reached the end. The magic key of the lumber room closet slipped with gratifying ease into the keyhole of a green door confronting them, and would have accomplished the act promised by its smooth entrance, had not a burst of strange sounds coming from behind the door caused our explorers to pause. Two terrible voices, a man's and a woman's, now rising to a passionate pitch, now sinking to raucous undertones, were exchanging insults in Gutnish as spoken by the fisherfolk of Western Zembla. An abominable threat made the woman shriek out in fright. Sudden silence ensued, presently broken by the man's murmuring some brief phrase of casual approval ("Perfect, my dear," or "Couldn't be better") that was more eerie than anything that had come before.
	Without consulting each other, the young Prince and his friend veered in absurd panic and, with the pedometer beating wildly, raced back the way they had come. "Ouf!" said Oleg once the last shelf had been replaced. "You're all chalky behind," said the young Prince as they swung upstairs. They found Beauchamp and Campbell ending their game in a draw. It was near dinner time. The two lads were told to wash their hands. The recent thrill of adventure had been superseded already by another sort of excitement. They locked themselves up. The tap ran unheeded. Both were in a manly state and moaning like doves.
	This detailed recollection, whose structure and maculation have taken some time to describe in this note, skimmed through the King's memory in one instant. Certain creatures of the past, and this was one of them, may lie dormant for thirty years as this one had, while their natural habitat undergoes calamitous alterations. Soon after the discovery of the secret passage he almost died of pneumonia. In his delirium he would strive one moment to follow a luminous disk probing an endless tunnel and try the next to clasp the melting haunches of his fair ingle. To recuperate he was sent for a couple of seasons to southern Europe. The death of Oleg at fifteen, in a toboggan accident, helped to obliterate the reality of their adventure. A national revolution was needed to make that secret passage real again.
	Having satisfied himself that the guard's creaky steps had moved some distance away, the King opened the closet. It was empty now, save for the tiny volume of Timon Afinsken still lying in one corner, and for some old sport clothes and gymnasium shoes crammed into the bottom compartment. The footfalls were now coming back. He did not dare pursue his examination and relocked the closet door.
	It was evident he would need a few moments of perfect security to perform with a minimum of noise a succession of small actions: enter the closet, lock it from the inside, remove the shelves, open the secret door, replace the shelves, slip into the yawning darkness, close the secret door and lock it. Say ninety seconds.
	He stepped out into the gallery, and the guard, a rather handsome but incredibly stupid Extremist, immediately advanced towards him. "I have a certain urgent desire," said the King. "I want, Hal, to play the piano before going to bed." Hal (if that was his name) led the way to the music room where, as the King knew, Odon kept vigil over the shrouded harp. He was a fox-browed, burly Irishman, with a pink head now covered by the rakish cap of a Russki factory worker. The King sat down at the Bechstein and, as soon as they were left alone, explained briefly the situation while making tinkling notes with one hand: "Never heard of any passage," muttered Odon with the annoyance of a chess player who is shown how he might have saved the game he has lost. Was His Majesty absolutely sure? His Majesty was. Did he suppose it took one out of the Palace? Definitely out of the Palace.
	Anyway, Odon had to leave in a few moments, being due to act that night in The Merman, a fine old melodrama which had not been performed, he said, for at least three decades. "I'm quite satisfied with my own melodrama," remarked the King. "Alas," said Odon. Furrowing his forehead, he slowly got into his leathern coat. One could do nothing tonight. If he asked the commandant to be left on duty, it would only provoke suspicion, and the least suspicion might be fatal. Tomorrow he would find some opportunity to inspect that new avenue of escape, if it was that and not a dead end. Would Charlie (His Majesty) promise not to attempt anything until then? "But they are moving closer and closer," said the King alluding to the noise of rapping and ripping that came from the Picture Gallery. "Not really," said Odon, "one inch per hour, maybe two. I must be going now," he added indicating with a twitch of the eyelid the solemn and corpulent guard who was coming to relieve him.
	Under the unshakable but quite erroneous belief that the crown jewels were concealed somewhere in the Palace, the new administration had engaged a couple of foreign experts (see note to line 681) to locate them. The good work had been going on for a month. The two Russians, after practically dismantling the Council Chamber and several other rooms of state, had transferred their activities to that part of the gallery where the huge oils of Eystein had fascinated several generations of Zemblan princes and princesses. While unable to catch a likeness, and therefore wisely limiting himself to a conventional style of complimentary portraiture, Eystein showed himself to be a prodigious master of the trompe l'oeil in the depiction of various objects surrounding his dignified dead models and making them look even deader by contrast to the fallen petal or the polished panel that he rendered with such love and skill. But in some of these portraits Eystein had also resorted to a weird form of trickery: among his decorations of wood or wool, gold or velvet, he would insert one which was really made of the material elsewhere imitated by paint. This device which was apparently meant to enhance the effect of his tactile and tonal values had, however, something ignoble about it and disclosed not only an essential flaw in Eystein's talent, but the basic fact that "reality" is neither the subject nor the object of true art which creates its own special reality having nothing to do with the average "reality" perceived by the communal eye. But to return to our technicians whose tapping is approaching the gallery toward the bend where the King and Odon stand ready to part. At this spot hung a portrait representing a former Keeper of the Treasure, decrepit Count Kernel, who was painted with fingers resting lightly on an embossed and emblazoned box whose side facing the spectator consisted of an inset oblong made of real bronze, while upon the shaded top of the box, drawn in perspective, the artist had pictured a plate with the beautifully executed, twin-lobed, brainlike, halved kernel of a walnut.
	"They are in for a surprise," murmured Odon in his mother tongue, while in a corner the fat guard was going through some dutiful, rather lonesome, rifle-butt-banging formalities.
	The two Soviet professionals could be excused for assuming they would find a real receptacle behind the real metal. At the present moment they were about to decide whether to pry out the plaque or take down the picture; but we can anticipate a little and assure the reader that the receptacle, an oblong hole in the wall, was there all right; it contained nothing, however, except the broken bits of a nutshell.
	Somewhere an iron curtain had gone up, baring a painted one, with nymphs and nenuphars. "I shall bring you your flute tomorrow," cried Odon meaningfully in the vernacular, and smiled, and waved, already bemisted, already receding into the remoteness of his Thespian world.
	The fat guard led the King back to his room and turned him over to handsome Hal. It was half past nine. The King went to bed. The valet, a moody rascal, brought him his usual milk and cognac nightcap and took away his slippers and dressing gown. The man was practically out of the room when the King commanded him to put out the light, upon which an arm re-entered and a gloved hand found and turned the switch. Distant lightning still throbbed now and then in the window. The King finished his drink in the dark and replaced the empty tumbler on the night table where it knocked with a subdued ring against a steel flashlight prepared by the thoughtful authorities in case electricity failed as it lately did now and then.
	He could not sleep. Turning his head he watched the line of light under the door. Presently it was gently opened and his handsome young jailer peeped in. A bizarre little thought danced through the King's mind; but all the youth wanted was to warn his prisoner that he intended to join his companions in the adjacent court, and that the door would be locked until he returned. If, however, the ex-King needed anything, he could call from his window. "How long will you be absent?" asked the King. "Yeg ved ik [I know not]," answered the guard. "Good night, bad boy," said the King.
	He waited for the guard's silhouette to enter the light in the courtyard where the other Thuleans welcomed him to their game. Then, in secure darkness, the King rummaged for some clothes on the floor of the closet and pulled on, over his pajamas, what felt like skiing trousers and something that smelled like an old sweater. Further gropings yielded a pair of sneakers and a woolen headgear with flaps. He then went through the actions mentally rehearsed before. As he was removing the second shelf, an object fell with a miniature thud; he guessed what it was and took it with him as a talisman.
	He dared not press the button of his torch until properly engulfed, nor could he afford a noisy stumble, and therefore negotiated the eighteen invisible steps in a more or less sitting position like a timid novice bum-scraping down the lichened rocks of Mt. Kron. The dim light he discharged at last was now his dearest companion, Oleg's ghost, the phantom of freedom. He experienced a blend of anguish and exultation, a kind of amorous joy, the like of which he had last known on the day of his coronation, when, as he walked to his throne, a few bars of incredibly rich, deep, plenteous music (whose authorship and physical source he was never able to ascertain) struck his ear, and he inhaled the hair oil of the pretty page who had bent to brush a rose petal off the footstool, and by the light of his torch the King now saw that he was hideously garbed in bright red.
	The secret passage seemed to have grown more squalid. The intrusion of its surroundings was even more evident than on the day when two lads shivering in thin jerseys and shorts had explored it. The pool of opalescent ditch water had grown in length; along its edge walked a sick bat like a cripple with a broken umbrella. A remembered spread of colored sand bore the thirty-year-old patterned imprint of Oleg's shoe, as immortal as the tracks of an Egyptian child's tame gazelle made thirty centuries ago on blue Nilotic bricks drying in the sun. And, at the spot where the passage went through the foundations of a museum, there had somehow wandered down, to exile and disposal, a headless statue of Mercury, conductor of souls to the Lower World, and a cracked krater with two black figures shown dicing under a black palm.
	The last bend of the passage, ending in the green door, contained an accumulation of loose boards across which the fugitive stepped not without stumbling. He unlocked the door and upon pulling it open was stopped by a heavy black drapery. As he began fumbling among its vertical folds for some sort of ingress, the weak light of his torch rolled its hopeless eye and went out. He dropped it: it fell into muffled nothingness. The King thrust both arms into the deep folds of the chocolate-smelling cloth and, despite the uncertainty and the danger of the moment, was, as it were, physically reminded by his own movement of the comical, at first controlled, then frantic undulations of a theatrical curtain through which a nervous actor tries vainly to pass. This grotesque sensation, at this diabolical instant, solved the mystery of the passage even before he wriggled at last through the drapery into the dimly lit, dimly cluttered lumbarkamer which had once been Iris Acht's dressing room in the Royal Theater. It still was what it had become after her death: a dusty hole of a room communicating with a kind of hall whither performers would sometimes wander during rehearsals. Pieces of mythological scenery leaning against the wall half concealed a large dusty velvet-framed photograph of King Thurgus - bushy mustache, pince-nez, medals - as he was at the time when the mile-long corridor provided an extravagant means for his trysts with Iris.
	The scarlet-clothed fugitive blinked and made for the hall. It led to a number of dressing rooms. Somewhere beyond it a tempest of plaudits grew in volume before petering out. Other distant sounds marked the beginning of the intermission. Several costumed performers passed by the King, and in one of them he recognized Odon. He was wearing a velvet jacket with brass buttons, knickerbockers and striped stockings, the Sunday attire of Gutnish fishermen, and his fist still clutched the cardboard knife with which he had just dispatched his sweetheart. "Good God," he said on seeing the King.
	Plucking a couple of cloaks from a heap of fantastic raiments, Odon pushed the King toward a staircase leading to the street. Simultaneously there was a commotion among a group of people smoking on the landing. An old intriguer who by dint of fawning on various Extremist officials had obtained the post of Scenic Director, suddenly pointed a vibrating finger at the King, but being afflicted with a bad stammer could not utter the words of indignant recognition which were making his dentures clack. The King tried to pull the front flap of his cap over his face - and almost lost his footing at the bottom of the narrow stairs. Outside it was raining. A puddle reflected his scarlet silhouette. Several vehicles stood in a transverse lane. It was there that Odon usually left his racing car. For one dreadful second he thought it was gone, but then recalled with exquisite relief that he had parked it that night in an adjacent alley. (See the interesting note to line 149).

	
Lines 131-132: I was the shadow of the waxwing slain by feigned remoteness in the windowpane.

The exquisite melody of the two lines opening the poem is picked up here. The repetition of that long-drawn note is saved from monotony by the subtle variation in line 132 where the assonance between its second word and the rhyme gives the ear a kind of languorous pleasure as would the echo of some half-remembered sorrowful song whose strain is more meaningful than its words. Today, where the "feigned remoteness" has indeed performed its dreadful duty, and the poem we have is the only "shadow" that remains, we cannot help reading into these lines something more than mirrorplay and mirage shimmer. We feel doom, in the image of Gradus, eating away the miles and miles of "feigned remoteness" between him and poor Shade. He, too, is to meet, in his urgent and blind flight, a reflection that will shatter him.
	Although Gradus availed himself of all varieties of locomotion - rented cars, local trains, escalators, airplanes - somehow the eye of the mind sees him, and the muscles of the mind feel him, as always streaking across the sky with black traveling bag in one hand and loosely folded umbrella in the other, in a sustained glide high over sea and land. The force propelling him is the magic action of Shade's poem itself, the very mechanism and sweep of verse, the powerful iambic motor. Never before has the inexorable advance of fate received such a sensuous form (for other images of that transcendental tramp's approach see note to line 17).



Line 137: lemniscate

"A unicursal bicircular quartic" says my weary old dictionary. I cannot understand what this has to do with bicycling and suspect that Shade's phrase has no real meaning. As other poets before him, he seems to have fallen here under the spell of misleading euphony.
	To take a striking example: what can be more resounding, more resplendent, more suggestive of choral and sculptured beauty, than the word coramen? In reality, however, it merely denotes the rude strap with which a Zemblan herdsman attaches his humble provisions and ragged blanket to the meekest of his cows when driving them up to the vebodar (upland pastures).



Lines 143: a clockwork toy

By a stroke of luck I have seen it! One evening in May or June I dropped in to remind my friend about a collection of pamphlets, by his grandfather, an eccentric clergyman, that he had once said was stored in the basement. I found him gloomily waiting for some people (members of his department, I believe, and their wives) who were coming for a formal dinner. He willingly took me down into the basement but after rummaging among piles of dusty books and magazines, said he would try to find them some other time. It was then that I saw it on a shelf, between a candlestick and a handless alarm clock. He, thinking I might think it had belonged to his dead daughter, hastily explained it was as old as he. The boy was a little Negro of painted tin with a keyhole in his side and no breadth to speak of, just consisting of two more or less fused profiles, and his wheelbarrow was now all bent and broken. He said, brushing the dust off his sleeves, that he kept it as a kind of memento mori - he had had a strange fainting fit one day in his childhood while playing with that toy. We were interrupted by Sybil's voice calling from above; but never mind, now the rusty clockwork shall work again, for I have the key.



Line 149: one foot upon a mountain

The Bera Range, a two-hundred-mile-long chain of rugged mountains, not quite reaching the northern end of the Zemblan peninsula (cut off basally by an impassable canal from the mainland of madness), divides it into two parts, the flourishing eastern region of Onhava and other townships, such as Aros and Grindelwod, and the much narrower western strip with its quaint fishing hamlets and pleasant beach resorts. The two coasts are connected by two asphalted highways; the older one shirks difficulties by running first along the eastern slopes northward to Odevalla, Yeslove and Embla, and only then turning west at the northmost point of the peninsula; the newer one, an elaborate, twisting, marvelously graded road, traverses the range westward from just north of Onhava to Bregberg, and is termed in tourist booklets a "scenic drive." Several trails cross the mountains at various points and lead to passes none of which exceeds an altitude of five thousand feet; a few peaks rise some two thousand feet higher and retain their snow in midsummer; and from one of them, the highest and hardest, Mt. Glitterntin, one can distinguish on clear days, far out to the east, beyond the Gulf of Surprise, a dim iridescence which some say is Russia.
	After escaping from the theater, our friends planned to follow the old highway for twenty miles northward, and then turn left on an unfrequented dirt road that would have brought them eventually to the main hideout of the Karlists, a baronial castle in a fir wood on the eastern slope of the Bera Range. But the vigilant stutterer had finally exploded in spasmodic speech; telephones had frantically worked; and the fugitives had hardly covered a dozen miles, when a confused blaze in the darkness before them, at the intersection of the old and new highways, revealed a roadblock that at least had the merit of canceling both routes at one stroke.
	Odon spun the car around and at the first opportunity swerved westward into the mountains. The narrow and bumpy lane that engulfed them passed by a woodshed, arrived at a torrent, crossed it with a great clacking of boards, and presently degenerated into a stump-cluttered cutting. They were at the edge of Mandevil Forest. Thunder was rumbling in the terrible brown sky.
	For a few seconds both men stood looking upward. The night and the trees concealed the acclivity. From this point a good climber might reach Bregberg Pass by dawn - if he managed to hit a regular trail after pushing through the black wall of the forest. It was decided to part, Charlie proceeding toward the remote treasure in the sea cave, and Odon remaining behind as a decoy. He would, he said, lead them a merry chase, assume sensational disguises, and get into touch with the rest of the gang. His mother was an American, from New Wye in New England. She is said to have been the first woman in the world to shoot wolves, and, I believe, other animals, from an airplane.
	A handshake, a flash of lightning. As the King waded into the damp, dark bracken, its odor, its lacy resilience, and the mixture of soft growth and steep ground reminded him of the times he had picnicked hereabouts - in another part of the forest but on the same mountainside, and higher up, as a boy, on the boulderfield where Mr. Campbell had once twisted an ankle and had to be carried down, smoking his pipe, by two husky attendants. Rather full memories, on the whole. Wasn't there a hunting box nearby - just beyond Silfhar Falls? Good capercaillie and woodcock shooting - a sport much enjoyed by his late mother, Queen Blenda, a tweedy and horsy queen. Now as then, the rain seethed in the black trees, and if you paused you heard your heart thumping, and the distant roar of the torrent. What is the time, kot or? He pressed his repeater and, undismayed, it hissed and tinkled out ten twenty-one.
	Anyone who has tried to struggle up a steep slope, on a dark night, through a tangle of inimical vegetation, knows what a formidable task our mountaineer had before him. For more than two hours he kept at it, stumbling against stumps, falling into ravines, clutching at invisible bushes, fighting off an army of conifers. He lost his cloak. He wondered if he had not better curl up in the undergrowth and wait for daybreak. All at once a pinhead light gleamed ahead and presently he found himself staggering up a slippery, recently mown meadow. A dog barked. A stone rolled underfoot. He realized he was near a mountainside bore (farmhouse). He also realized that he had toppled into a deep muddy ditch.
	The gnarled farmer and his plump wife who, like personages in an old tedious tale offered the drenched fugitive a welcome shelter, mistook him for an eccentric camper who had got detached from his group. He was allowed to dry himself in a warm kitchen where he was given a fairy-tale meal of bread and cheese, and a bowl of mountain mead. His feelings (gratitude, exhaustion, pleasant warmth, drowsiness and so on) were too obvious to need description. A fire of larch roots crackled in the stove, and all the shadows of his lost kingdom gathered to play around his rocking chair as he dozed off between that blaze and the tremulous light of a little earthenware cresset, a beaked affair rather like a Roman lamp, hanging above a shelf where poor beady baubles and bits of nacre became microscopic soldiers swarming in desperate battle. He woke up with a crimp in the neck at the first full cowbell of dawn, found his host outside, in a damp corner consigned to the humble needs of nature, and bade the good grunter (mountain farmer) show him the shortest way to the pass. "I'll rouse lazy Garh," said the farmer.
	A rude staircase led up to a loft. The farmer placed his gnarled hand on the gnarled balustrade and directed toward the upper darkness a guttural call: "Garh! Garh!" Although given to both sexes, the name is, strictly speaking, a masculine one, and the King expected to see emerge from the loft a bare-kneed mountain lad like a tawny angel. Instead there appeared a disheveled young hussy wearing only a man's shirt that came down to her pink shins and an oversized pair of brogues. A moment later, as in a transformation act, she reappeared, her yellow hair still hanging lank and loose, but the dirty shirt replaced by a dirty pullover, and her legs sheathed in corduroy pants. She was told to conduct the stranger to a spot from which he could easily reach the pass. A sleepy and sullen expression blurred whatever appeal her snub-nosed round face might have had for the local shepherds; but she complied readily enough with her father's wish. His wife was crooning an ancient song as she busied herself with pot and pan.
	Before leaving, the King asked his host, whose name was Griff, to accept an old gold piece he chanced to have in his pocket, the only money he possessed. Griff vigorously refused and, still remonstrating, started the laborious business of unlocking and unbolting two or three heavy doors. The King glanced at the old woman, received a wink of approval, and put the muted ducat on the mantelpiece, next to a violet seashell against which was propped a color print representing an elegant guardsman with his bare-shouldered wife - Karl the Beloved, as he was twenty odd years before, and his young queen, an angry young virgin with coal-black hair and ice-blue eyes.
	The stars had just faded. He followed the girl and a happy sheepdog up the overgrown trail that glistened with the ruby dew in the theatrical light of an alpine dawn. The very air seemed tinted and glazed. A sepulchral chill emanated from the sheer cliff along which the trail ascended; but on the opposite precipitous side, here and there between the tops of fir trees growing below, gossamer gleams of sunlight were beginning to weave patterns of warmth. At the next turning this warmth enveloped the fugitive, and a black butterfly came dancing down a pebbly rake. The path narrowed still more and gradually deteriorated amidst a jumble of boulders. The girl pointed to the slopes beyond it. He nodded. "Now go home," he said. "I shall rest here and then continue alone."
	He sank down on the grass near a patch of matted elfinwood and inhaled the bright air. The panting dog lay down at his feet. Garb smiled for the first time. Zemblan mountain girls are as a rule mere mechanisms of haphazard lust, and Garh was no exception. As soon as she had settled beside him, she bent over and pulled over and off her tousled head the thick gray sweater, revealing her naked back and blancmange breasts, and flooded her embarrassed companion with ail the acridity of ungroomed womanhood. She was about to proceed with her stripping but he stopped her with a gesture and got up. He thanked her for all her kindness. He patted the innocent dog; and without turning once, with a springy step, the King started to walk up the turfy incline.
	He was still chuckling over the wench's discomfiture when he came to the tremendous stones amassed around a small lake which he had reached once or twice from the rocky Kronberg side many years ago. Now he glimpsed the flash of the pool through the aperture of a natural vault, a masterpiece of erosion. The vault was low and he bent his head to step down toward the water. In its limpid tintarron he saw his scarlet reflection but; oddly enough, owing to what seemed to be at first blush an optical illusion, this reflection was not at his feet but much further; moreover, it was accompanied by the ripple-warped reflection of a ledge that jutted high above his present position. And finally, the strain on the magic of the image caused it to snap as his red-sweatered, red-capped doubleganger turned and vanished, whereas he, the observer, remained immobile. He now advanced to the very lip of the water and was met there by a genuine reflection, much larger and clearer than the one that had deceived him. He skirted the pool. High up in the deep-blue sky jutted the empty ledge whereon a counterfeit king had just stood. A shiver of alfear (uncontrollable fear caused by elves) ran between his shoulderblades. He murmured a familiar prayer, crossed himself, and resolutely proceeded toward the pass. At a high point upon an adjacent ridge a steinmann (a heap of stones erected as a memento of an ascent) had donned a cap of red wool in his honor. He trudged on. But his heart was a conical ache poking him from below in the throat, and after a while he stopped again to take stock of conditions and decide whether to scramble up the steep debris slope in front of him or to strike off to the right along a strip of grass, gay with gentians, that went winding between lichened rocks. He elected the second route and in due course reached the pass.
	Great fallen crags diversified the wayside. The nippern (domed hills or "reeks") to the south were broken by a rock and grass slope into light and shadow. Northward melted the green, gray, bluish mountains - Falkberg with its hood of snow, Mutraberg with the fan of its avalanche, Paberg (Mt. Peacock), and others - separated by narrow dim valleys with intercalated cotton-wool bits of cloud that seemed placed between the receding sets of ridges to prevent their flanks from scraping against one another. Beyond them, in the final blue, loomed Mt. Glitterntin, a serrated edge of bright foil; and southward, a tender haze enveloped more distant ridges which led to one another in an endless array, through every grade of soft evanescence.
	The pass had been reached, granite and gravity had been overcome; but the most dangerous stretch lay ahead. Westward a succession of heathered slopes led down to the shining sea. Up to this moment the mountain had stood between him and the gulf; now he was exposed to that arching blaze. He began the descent.
	Three hours later he trod level ground. Two old women working in an orchard unbent in slow motion and stared after him. He had passed the pine groves of Boscobel and was approaching the quay of Blawick; when a black police car turned out on a transverse road and pulled up next to him: "The joke has gone too far," said the driver. "One hundred clowns are packed in Onhava jail, and the ex-King should be among them. Our local prison is much too small for more kings. The next masquerader will be shot at sight. What's your real name, Charlie?"
	"I'm British. I'm a tourist," said the King. "Well, anyway, take off that red fufa. And the cap. Give them here." He tossed the things in the back of the car and drove off.
	The King walked on; the top of his blue pajamas tucked into his skiing pants might easily pass for a fancy shirt. There was a pebble in his left shoe but he was too fagged out to do anything about it.
	He recognized the seashore restaurant where many years earlier he had lunched incognito with two amusing, very amusing, sailors. Several heavily armed Extremists were drinking beer on the geranium-lined veranda, among the routine vacationists, some of whom were busy writing to distant friends. Through the geraniums, a gloved hand gave the King a picture postcard on which he found scribbled: Proceed to R. C. Bon voyage! Feigning a casual stroll, he reached the end of the embankment.
	It was a lovely breezy afternoon. with a western horizon like a luminous vacuum that sucked in one's eager heart. The King, now at the most critical point of his journey, looked about him, scrutinizing the few promenaders and trying to decide which of them might be police agents in disguise, ready to pounce upon him as soon as he vaulted the parapet and made for the Rippleson Caves. Only a single sail dyed a royal red marred with some human interest the marine expanse. Nitra and Indra (meaning "inner" and "outer"), two black islets that seemed to address each other in cloaked parley, were being photographed from the parapet by a Russian tourist, thickset, many-chinned, with a general's fleshy nape. His faded wife, wrapped up floatingly in a flowery écharpe, remarked in singsong Moscovan "Every time I see that kind of frightful disfigurement I can't help thinking of Nina's boy. War is an awful thing."
	"War?" queried her consort. "That must have been the explosion at the Glass Works in 1951 - not war." They slowly walked past the King in the direction he had come from. On a sidewalk bench, facing the sea, a man with his crutches beside him was reading the Onhava Post which featured on the first page Odon in an Extremist uniform and Odon in the part of the Merman. Incredible as it may seem the palace guard had never realized that identity before. Now a goodly sum was offered for his capture. Rhythmically the waves lapped the shingle. The newspaper reader's face had been atrociously injured in the recently mentioned explosion, and all the art of plastic surgery had only resulted in a hideous tessellated texture with parts of pattern and parts of outline seeming to change, to fuse or to separate, like fluctuating cheeks and chins in a distortive mirror.
	The short stretch of beach between the restaurant at the beginning of the promenade and the granite rocks at its end was almost empty: far to the left three fishermen were loading a rowboat with kelp-brown nets, and directly under the sidewalk, an elderly woman wearing a polka-dotted dress and having for headgear a cocked newspaper (EX-KING SEEN -) sat knitting on the shingle with her back to the street. Her bandaged legs were stretched out on the sand; on one side of her lay a pair of carpet slippers and on the other a ball of red wool, the leading filament of which she would tug at every now and then with the immemorial elbow jerk of a Zemblan knitter to give a turn to her yarn clew and slacken the thread. Finally, on the sidewalk a little girl in a ballooning skirt was clumsily but energetically clattering about on roller skates. Could a dwarf in the police force pose as a pigtailed child?
	Waiting for the Russian couple to recede, the King stopped beside the bench. The mosaic-faced man folded his newspaper, and one second before he spoke (in the neutral interval between smoke puff and detonation), the King knew it was Odon.
	"All one could do at short notice," said Odon, plucking at his cheek to display how the varicolored semi-transparent film adhered to his face, altering its contours according to stress. "A polite person," he added, "does not, normally, examine too closely a poor fellow's disfigurement."
	"I was looking for shpiks [plainclothesmen]" said the King. "All day," said Odon, "they have been patrolling the quay. They are dining at present."
	"I'm thirsty and hungry," said the King. "That's young Baron Mandevil - chap who had that duel last year. Let's go now."
	"Couldn't we take him too?"
	"Wouldn't come - got a wife and a baby. Come on, Charlie, come on, Your Majesty."
	"He was my throne page on Coronation Day." 
	Thus chatting, they reached the Rippleson Caves. I trust the reader has enjoyed this note.
	
	
Line 162: With his pure tongue, etc.

This is a singularly roundabout way of describing a country girl's shy kiss; but the whole passage is very baroque. My own boyhood was too happy and healthy to contain anything remotely like the fainting fits experienced by Shade: It must have been with him a mild form of epilepsy, a derailment of the nerves at the same spot, on the same curve of the tracks, every day, for several weeks, until nature repaired the damage. Who can forget the good-natured faces, glossy with sweat, of copper-chested railway workers leaning upon their spades and following with their eyes the windows of the great express cautiously gliding by?
	
	
Line 167: There was a time, etc.

The poet began Canto Two (on his fourteenth card) on July 5, his sixtieth birthday (see note to line 181, "today"). My slip - change to sixty-first.



Line 169: Survival after death

See note to line 549.



Line 171: a great conspiracy

For almost a whole year after the King's escape the Extremists remained convinced that he and Odon had not left Zembla. The mistake can be only ascribed to the streak of stupidity that fatally runs through the most competent tyranny. Airborne machines and everything connected with them cast a veritable spell over the minds of our new rulers whom kind history had suddenly given a boxful of these zipping and zooming gadgets to play with. That an important fugitive would not perform by air the act of fleeing seemed to them inconceivable. Within minutes after the King and the actor had clattered down the backstairs of the Royal Theater, every wing in the sky and on the ground had been accounted for - such was the efficiency of the government. During the next weeks not one private or commercial plane was allowed to take off, and the inspection of transients became so rigorous and lengthy that international lines decided to cancel stopovers at Onhava. There were some casualties. A crimson balloon was enthusiastically shot down and the aeronaut (a well-known meteorologist) drowned in the Gulf of Surprise. A pilot from a Lapland base flying on a mission of mercy got lost in the fog and was so badly harassed by Zemblan fighters that he settled atop a mountain peak. Some excuse for all this could be found. The illusion of the King's presence in the wilds of Zembla was kept up by royalist plotters who decoyed entire regiments into searching the mountains and woods of our rugged peninsula. The government spent a ludicrous amount of energy on solemnly screening the hundreds of impostors packed in the country's jails. Most of them clowned their way back to freedom; a few, alas, fell. Then, in the spring of the following year, a stunning piece of news came from abroad. The Zemblan actor Odon was directing the making of a cinema picture in Paris!
	It was now correctly conjectured that if Odon had fled, the King had fled too: At an extraordinary session of the Extremist government there was passed from hand to hand, in grim silence, a copy of a French newspaper with the headline: L'EN-ROI DE ZEMBLA EST-IL À PARIS? Vindictive exasperation rather than state strategy moved the secret organization of which Gradus was an obscure member to plot the destruction of the royal fugitive. Spiteful thugs! They may be compared to hoodlums who itch to torture the invulnerable gentleman whose testimony clapped them in prison for life. Such convicts have been known to go berserk at the thought that their elusive victim whose very testicles they crave to twist and tear with their talons, is sitting at a pergola feast on a sunny island or fondling some pretty young creature between his knees in serene security - and laughing at them! One supposes that no hell can be worse than the helpless rage they experience as the awareness of that implacable sweet mirth reaches them and suffuses them, slowly destroying their brutish brains. A group of especially devout Extremists calling themselves the Shadows had got together and swore to hunt down the King and kill him wherever he might be. They were, in a sense, the shadow twins of the Karlists and indeed several had cousins or even brothers among the followers of the King. No doubt, the origin of either group could be traced to various reckless rituals in student fraternities and military clubs, and their development examined in terms of fads and anti-fads; but, whereas an objective historian associates a romantic and noble glamor with Karlism, its shadow group must strike one as something definitely Gothic and nasty. The grotesque figure of Gradus, a cross between bat and crab, was not much odder than many other Shadows, such as, for example, Nodo, Odon's epileptic half-brother who cheated at cards, or a mad Mandevil who had lost a leg in trying to make anti-matter. Gradus had long been a member of all sorts of jejune leftist organizations. He had never killed, though coming rather close to it several times in his gray life. He insisted later that when he found himself designated to track down and murder the King, the choice was decided by a show of cards - but let us not forget that it was Nodo who shuffled and dealt them out. Perhaps our man's foreign origin secretly prompted a nomination that would not cause any son of Zembla to incur the dishonor of actual regicide. We can well imagine the scene: the ghastly neon lights of the laboratory, in an annex of the Glass Works, where the Shadows happened to hold their meeting that night; the ace of spades lying on the tiled floor, the vodka gulped down out of test tubes; the many hands clapping Gradus on his round back, and the dark exultation of the man as he received those rather treacherous congratulations. We place this fatidic moment at 0:05, July 2, 1959 - which happens to be also the date upon which an innocent poet penned the first lines of his last poem.
	Was Gradus really a suitable person for the job? Yes and no. One day in his early youth, when he worked as a messenger boy for a large and depressing firm of cardboard box manufacturers, he quietly helped three companions to ambush a local lad whom they wished to beat up for winning a motorcycle at a fair. Young Gradus obtained an axe and directed the felling of a tree: it crashed improperly, though, not quite blocking the country lane down which their carefree prey used to ride in the growing dusk. The poor lad whizzing along toward the spot where those roughs crouched was a slim delicate-looking Lorrainer, and one must have been vile indeed to begrudge him his harmless enjoyment. Curiously enough, while they were lying in wait, our future regicide fell asleep in a ditch and thus missed the brief affray during which two of the attackers were knuckledusted and knocked out by the brave Lorrainer, and the third run over and crippled for life.
	Gradus never became a real success in the glass business to which he turned again and again between his wine-selling and pamphlet-printing jobs. He started as a maker of Cartesian devils - imps of bottle glass bobbing up and down in methylate-filled tubes hawked during Catkin Week on the boulevards. He also worked as teazer, and later as flasher, at governmental factories - and was, I believe, more or less responsible for the remarkably ugly red-and-amber windows in the great public lavatory at rowdy but colorful Kalixhaven where the sailors are. He claimed to have improved the glitter and rattle of the so-called feuilles-d'alarme used by grape growers and orchardmen to scare the birds. I have staggered the notes referring to him in such a fashion that the first (see note to line 17 where some of this other activities are adumbrated) is the vaguest while those that follow become gradually clearer as gradual Gradus approaches in space and time.
	Mere springs and coils produced the inward movements of our clockwork man. He might be termed a Puritan. One essential dislike, formidable in its simplicity, pervaded his dull soul: he disliked injustice and deception. He disliked their union - they were always together - with a wooden passion that neither had, nor needed, words to express itself. Such a dislike should have deserved praise had it not been a by-product of the man's hopeless stupidity. He called unjust and deceitful everything that surpassed his understanding. He worshiped general ideas and did so with pedantic aplomb. The generality was godly, the specific diabolical. If one person was poor and the other wealthy it did not matter what precisely had ruined one or made the other rich; the difference itself was unfair, and the poor man who did not denounce it was as wicked as the rich one who ignored it: People who knew too much, scientists, writers, mathematicians, crystallographers and so forth, were no better than kings or priests: they all held an unfair share of power of which others were cheated. A plain decent fellow should constantly be on the watch for some piece of clever knavery on the part of nature and neighbor.
	The Zemblan Revolution provided Gradus with satisfactions but also produced frustrations. One highly irritating episode seems retrospectively most significant as belonging to an order of things that Gradus should have learned to expect but never did. An especially brilliant impersonator of the King, the tennis ace Julius Steinmann (son of the well-known philanthropist), had eluded for several months the police who had been driven to the limits of exasperation by his mimicking to perfection the voice of Charles the Beloved in a series of underground radio speeches deriding the government. When finally captured he was tried by a special commission, of which Gradus was a member, and condemned to death. The firing squad bungled their job, and a little later the gallant young man was found recuperating from his wounds at a provincial hospital. When Gradus learned of this, he flew into one of his rare rages - not because the fact presupposed royalist machinations, but because the clean, honest, orderly course of death had been interfered with in an unclean, dishonest, disorderly manner. Without consulting anybody he rushed to the hospital, stormed in, located Julius in a crowded ward and managed to fire twice, both times missing, before the gun was wrested from him by a hefty male nurse. He rushed back to headquarters and returned with a dozen soldiers but his patient had disappeared.
	Such things rankle - but what can Gradus do? The huddled fates engage in a great conspiracy against Gradus. One notes with pardonable glee that his likes are never granted the ultimate thrill of dispatching their victim themselves. Oh, surely, Gradus is active, capable, helpful, often indispensable. At the foot of the scaffold, on a raw and gray morning, it is Gradus who sweeps the night's powder snow off the narrow steps; but his long leathery face will not be the last one that the man who must mount those steps is to see in this world. It is Gradus who buys the cheap fiber valise that a luckier guy will plant, with a time bomb inside, under the bed of a former henchman. Nobody knows better than Gradus how to set a trap by means of a fake advertisement, but the rich old widow whom it hooks is courted and slain by another. When the fallen tyrant is tied, naked and howling, to a plank in the public square and killed piecemeal by the people who cut slices out, and eat them, and distribute his living body among themselves (as I read when young in a story about an Italian despot, which made of me a vegetarian for life), Gradus does not take part in the infernal sacrament: he points out the right instrument and directs the carving.
	All this is as it should be; the world needs Gradus. But Gradus should not kill kings. Vinogradus should never, never provoke God. Leningradus should not aim his peashooter at people even in dreams, because if he does, a pair of colossally thick, abnormally hairy arms will hug him from behind and squeeze, squeeze, squeeze.



Line 172: books and people

In a black pocketbook that I fortunately have with me I find, jotted down, here and there, among various extracts that had happened to please me (a footnote from Boswell's Life of Dr. Johnson, the inscriptions on the trees in Wordsmith's famous avenue, a quotation from St. Augustine, and so on), a few samples of John Shade's conversation which I had collected in order to refer to them in the presence of people whom my friendship with the poet might interest or annoy. His and my reader will, I trust, excuse me for breaking the orderly course of these comments and letting my illustrious friend speak for himself.
	Book reviewers being mentioned, he said: "I have never acknowledged printed praise though sometimes I longed to embrace the glowing image of this or that paragon of discernment; and I have never bothered to lean out of my window and empty my skoramis on some poor hack's pate. I regard both the demolishment and the rave with like detachment." 
	Kinbote: "I suppose you dismiss the first as the blabber of a blockhead and the second as a kind soul's friendly act?" 
	Shade: "Exactly."
	Speaking of the Head of the bloated Russian Department, Prof. Pnin, a regular martinet in regard to his underlings (happily, Prof. Botkin, who taught in another department, was not subordinated to that grotesque "perfectionist"): "How odd that Russian intellectuals should lack all sense of humor when they have such marvelous humorists as Gogol, Dostoevski, Chekhov, Zoshchenko, and those joint authors of genius Ilf and Petrov."
	Talking of the vulgarity of a certain burly acquaintance of ours: "The man is as corny as a cook-out chef apron." 
	Kinbote (laughing): "Wonderful!"
	The subject of teaching Shakespeare at college level having been introduced: "First of all, dismiss ideas, and social background, and train the freshman to shiver, to get drunk on the poetry of Hamlet or Lear, to read with his spine and not with his skull." 
	Kinbote: "You appreciate particularly the purple passages?" 
	Shade: "Yes, my dear Charles, I roll upon them as a grateful mongrel on a spot of turf fouled by a Great Dane."
	The respective impacts and penetrations of Marxism and Freudism being talked of, I said: "The worst of two false doctrines is always that which is harder to eradicate." 
	Shade: "No, Charlie, there are simpler criteria: Marxism needs a dictator, and a dictator needs a secret police, and that is the end of the world; but the Freudian, no matter how stupid, can still cast his vote at the poll, even if he is pleased to call it [smiling] political pollination."
	Of students' papers: "I am generally very benevolent [said Shade]. But there are certain trifles I do not forgive." 
	Kinbote: "For instance?"
	"Not having read the required book. Having read it like an idiot. Looking in it for symbols; example: 'The author uses the striking image green leaves because green is the symbol of happiness and frustration.' I am also in the habit of lowering a student's mark catastrophically if he uses 'simple' and 'sincere' in a commendatory sense; examples: 'Shelley's style is always very simple and good'; or 'Yeats is always sincere.' This is widespread, and when I hear a critic speaking of an author's sincerity I know that either the critic or the author is a fool." 
	Kinbote: "But I am told this manner of thinking is taught in high school?"
	"That's where the broom should begin to sweep. A child should have thirty specialists to teach him thirty subjects, and not one harassed schoolmarm to show him a picture of a rice field and tell him this is China because she knows nothing about China, or anything else, and cannot tell the difference between longitude and latitude." 
	Kinbote: "Yes. I agree."



Line 181: Today

Namely, July 5, 1959, 6th Sunday after Trinity. Shade began writing Canto Two "early in the morning" (thus noted at the top of card 14). He continued (down to line 208) on and off throughout the day. Most of the evening and a part of the night were devoted to what his favorite eighteenth-century writers have termed "the Bustle and Vanity of the World." After the last guest had gone (on a bicycle), and the ashtrays had been emptied, all the windows were dark for a couple of hours; but then, at about 3 A. M., I saw from my upstairs bathroom that the poet had gone back to his desk in the lilac light of his den, and this nocturnal session brought the canto to line 230 (card 18). On another trip to the bathroom an hour and a half later, at sunrise, I found the light transferred to the bedroom, and smiled indulgently, for, according to my deductions, only two nights had passed since the three-thousand-nine-hundred-ninety-ninth time - but no matter. A few minutes later all was solid darkness again, and I went back to bed.
	On July 5th, at noontime, in the other hemisphere, on the rain-swept tarmac of the Onhava airfield, Gradus, holding a French passport, walked toward a Russian commercial plane bound for Copenhagen, and this event synchronized with Shade's starting in the early morning (Atlantic seaboard time) to compose, or to set down after composing in bed, the opening lines of Canto Two. When almost twenty-four hours later he got to line 230, Gradus, after a refreshing night at the summer house of our consul in Copenhagen, an important Shadow, had entered, with the Shadow, a clothes store in order to conform to his description in later notes (to lines 286 and 408). Migraine again worse today.
	As to my own activities, they were I am afraid most unsatisfactory from all points of view - emotional, creative, and social. That jinxy streak had started on the eve when I had been kind enough to offer a young friend - a candidate for my third ping-pong table who after a sensational series of traffic violations had been deprived of his driving license - to take him, in my powerful Kramler, all the way to his parents' estate, a little matter of two hundred miles. In the course of an all-night party among among crowds of strangers - young people, old people, cloyingly perfumed girls - in an atmosphere of fireworks, barbecue smoke, horseplay, jazz music, and auroral swimming, I lost all contact with the silly boy, was made to dance, was made to sing, got involved in the most boring bibble-babble imaginable with various relatives of the child, and finally, in some inconceivable manner, found myself transported to a different party on a different estate, where, after some indescribable parlor games, in which my beard was nearly snipped off, I had a fruit-and-rice breakfast and was taken by my anonymous host, a drunken old fool in tuxedo and riding breeches, on a stumbling round of his stables. Upon locating my car (off the road, in a pine grove), I tossed out of the driver's seat a pair of soggy swimming trunks and a girl's silver slipper. The brakes had aged overnight, and I soon ran out of gas on a desolate stretch of road. Six o'clock was being chimed by the clocks of Wordsmith College, when I reached Arcady, swearing to myself never to be caught like that again and innocently looking forward to the solace of a quiet evening with my poet. Only when I saw the beribboned flat carton I had placed on a chair in my hallway did I realize that I had almost missed his birthday.
	Some time ago I had noticed that date on the jacket of one of his books; had pondered the awful decrepitude of his breakfast attire; had playfully measured my arm against his; had had bought for him in Washington an utterly gorgeous silk dressing gown, a veritable dragon skin of oriental chromas, fit for a samurai; and this was what the carton contained.
	Hurriedly I shed my clothes and, roaring my favorite hymn, took a shower. My versatile gardener, while administering to me a much-needed rubdown, informed me that the Shades were giving that night a big "buffet" dinner, and that Senator Blank (an outspoken statesman very much in the news and a cousin of John's) was expected.
	Now there is nothing a lonesome man relishes more than an impromptu birthday party, and thinking - nay, feeling certain - that my unattended telephone had been ringing all day, I blithely dialed the Shades' number, and of course it was Sybil who answered.
	"Bon soir, Sybil."
	"Oh, hullo, Charles. Had a nice trip?"
	"Well, to tell the truth -"
	"Look, I know you want John but he is resting right now, and I'm frightfully busy. He'll call you back later, okay?"
	"Later when - tonight?"
	"No, tomorrow, I guess: There goes that doorbell. Bye-bye." Strange. Why should Sybil have to listen to doorbells when, besides the maid and the cook, two white-coated hired boys were around? False pride prevented me from doing what I should have done - taken my royal gift under my arm and serenely marched over to that inhospitable house. Who knows - I might have been rewarded at the back door with a drop of kitchen sherry. I still hoped there had been a mistake, and Shade would telephone. It was a bitter wait, and the only effect that the bottle of champagne I drank all alone - now at this window, now at that - had on me was a bad crapula (hangover).
	From behind a drapery, from behind a box tree, through the golden veil of evening and through the black lacery of night, I kept watching that lawn, that drive, that fanlight, those jewel-bright windows. The sun had not yet set when, at a quarter past seven, I heard the first guest's car. Oh, I saw them all. I saw ancient Dr. Sutton, a snowy-headed, perfectly oval little gentleman arrive in a tottering Ford with his tall daughter, Mrs. Starr, a war widow. I saw a couple, later identified for me as Mr. Colt, a local lawyer, and his wife, whose blundering Cadillac half entered my driveway before retreating in a flurry of luminous nictitation. I saw a world-famous old writer, bent under the incubus of literary honors and his own prolific mediocrity, arrive in a taxi out of the dim times of yore when Shade and he had been joint editors of a little review. I saw Frank, the Shades' handyman, depart in the station wagon. I saw a retired professor of ornithology walk up from the highway where he had illegally parked his car. I saw, ensconced in their tiny Pulex, manned by her boy-handsome tousle-haired girl friend, the patroness of the arts who had sponsored Aunt Maud's last exhibition, I saw Frank return with the New Wye antiquarian, purblind Mr. Kaplun, and his wife, a dilapidated eagle. I saw a Korean graduate student in dinner jacket come on a bicycle, and the college president in baggy suit come on foot. I saw, in the performance of their ceremonial duties, in light and shadow, and from window to window, where like Martians the martinis and highballs cruised, the two white-coated youths from the hotel school, and realized that I knew well, quite well, the slighter of the two. And finally, at half past eight (when, I imagine, the lady of the house had begun to crack her finger joints as was her impatient wont) a long black limousine, officially glossy and rather funereal, glided into the aura of the drive, and while the fat Negro chauffeur hastened to open the car door, I saw, with pity, my poet emerge from his house, a white flower in his buttonhole and a grin of welcome on his liquor-flushed face.
	Next morning, as soon as I saw Sybil drive away to fetch Ruby the maid who did not sleep in the house, I crossed over with the prettily and reproachfully wrapped up carton. In front of their garage, on the ground, I noticed a buchmann, a little pillar of library books which Sybil had obviously forgotten there. I bent towards them under the incubus of curiosity: they were mostly by Mr. Faulkner; and the next moment Sybil wags back, her tires scrunching on the gravel right behind me. I added the books to my gift and placed the whole pile in her lap. That was nice of me - but what was that carton? Just a present for John. A present? Well, was it not his birthday yesterday? Yes, it was, but after all are not birthdays mere conventions? Conventions or not, but it was my birthday too - small difference of sixteen years, that's all. Oh my! Congratulations. And how did the party go? Well, you know what such parties are (here I reached in my pocket for another book - a book she did not expect). Yes, what are they? Oh, people whom you've known all your life and simply must invite once a year, men like Ben Kaplun and Dick Colt with whom we went to school, and that Washington cousin, and the fellow whose novels you and John think so phony. We did not ask you because we knew how tedious you find such affairs. This was my cue.
	"Speaking of novels," I said, "you remember we decided once, you, your husband and I, that Proust's rough masterpiece was a huge, ghoulish fairy tale, an asparagus dream, totally unconnected with any possible people in any historical France, a sexual travestissement and a colossal farce, the vocabulary of genius and its poetry, but no more, impossibly rude hostesses, please let me speak, and even ruder guests, mechanical Dostoevskian rows and Tolstoian nuances of snobbishness repeated and expanded to an unsufferable length, adorable seascapes, melting avenues, no, do not interrupt me, light and shade effects rivaling those of the greatest English poets, a flora of metaphors, described - by Cocteau, I think - as 'a mirage of suspended gardens,' and, I have not yet finished, an absurd, rubber-and-wire romance between a blond young blackguard (the fictitious Marcel), and an improbable jeune fille who has a pasted-on bosom, Vronski's (and Lyovin's) thick neck, and a cupid's buttocks for cheeks; but - and now let me finish sweetly - we were wrong, Sybil, we were wrong in denying our little beau ténébreux the capacity of evoking 'human interest': it is there, it is there - maybe a rather eighteenth-centuryish, or even seventeenth-centuryish, brand, but it is there. Please, dip or redip, spider, into this book [offering it], you will find a pretty marker in it bought in France, I want John to keep it. Au revoir, Sybil, I must go now. I think my telephone is ringing."
	I am a very sly Zemblan. Just in case, I had brought with me in my pocket the third and last volume of the Bibliothèque de la Pléiade edition, Paris, 1954, of Proust's work, wherein I had marked certain passages on pages 269-271. Mme. de Mortemart, having decided that Mme. de Valcourt would not be among the "elected" at her soirée, intended to send her a note on the next day saying "Dear Edith, I miss you, last night I did not expect you too much (Edith would wonder: how could she at all, since she did not invite me?) because I know you are not overfond of this sort of parties which, if anything, bore you."
	So much for John Shade's last birthday.



Lines 181-182: waxwings... cicadas

The bird of lines 1 - 4 and 131 is again with us. It will reappear in the ultimate line of the poem; and another cicada, leaving its envelope behind, will sing triumphantly at lines 236-244.



Line 189: Starover Blue

See note to line 627. This reminds one of the Royal Game of the Goose, but played here with little airplanes of painted tin: a wild-goose game, rather (go to square 209).



Line 209: gradual decay

Spacetime itself is decay; Gradus is flying west; he has reached gray-blue Copenhagen (see note to 181). After tomorrow (July 7) he will proceed to Paris. He has sped through this verse and is gone - presently to darken our pages again.



Lines 213-214: A syllogism

This may please a boy. Later in life we learn that we are those "others."



Line 230: a domestic ghost

Shade's former secretary, Jane Provost, whom I recently looked up in Chicago, told me about Hazel considerably more than her father did; he affected not to speak of his dead daughter, and since I did not foresee this work of inquiry and comment, I did not urge him to talk on the subject and unburden himself to me. True, in this canto he has unburdened himself pretty thoroughly, and his picture of Hazel is quite clear and complete; maybe a little too complete, architectonically, since the reader cannot help feeling that it has been expanded and elaborated to the detriment of certain other richer and rarer matters ousted by it. But a commentator's obligations cannot be shirked certain passages on pages 2 to achieve that kind of feat. I do notknow (being a  complete non-athlete,  whom the sports pages  of a  newspaperbore almost as much as does its kitchen section) what physical stress may beinvolved in serving one  day a sequence of thirty-six aces at sea  level andon the next soaring from a ski  jump 136 meters through bright mountain air.Colossal,  no  doubt,  and,  perhaps, inconceivable.  But I  have managed totranscend the rack and the wrench of literary metamorphosis.     We think in images, not in words; all right; when, however, we compose,recall, or refashion at midnight in our <122> brain something we wish to sayin tomorrow's sermon,  or  have said to Dolly  in a recent dream, or wish wehad said to that impertinent proctor  twenty years ago,  the images we thinkin  are, of course, verbal--and even audible  if we happen to be lonely  andold. We do not  usually think in words, since most of life is mimodrama, butwe certainly  do imagine  words  when  we  need them,  just  as  we  imagineeverything else capable of being perceived in  this, or even in a still moreunlikely, world. The book in my mind appeared at first, under my right cheek(I sleep on  my non-cardial side), as a  varicolored procession with  a headand  a tail, winding in a  general  western direction  through an  attentivetown. The children among you and all my old selves on their thresholds  werebeing promised  a stunning  show. I  then saw the show  in full detail  withevery scene  in its  place,  every  trapeze  in the stars.  Yet it was not amasque, not  a circus,  but  a bound book,  a short novel in a tongue as farremoved  as Thracian or  Pahlavi from  the fata-morganic  prose  that I  hadwilled into being in the desert  of  exile. An upsurge of nausea overcame meat the thought of imagining a hundred-thousand adequate words and I switchedon the light and called to Annette in the adjacent bedroom to give me one ofmy strictly rationed tablets.     The evolution  of my English, like that  of birds, had had its ups  anddowns. A beloved Cockney nurse had looked after me from 1900 (when I was oneyear old) to  1903.  She was  followed  by  a  succession of  three  Englishgovernesses (1903-1906, 1907-1909, and November,  1909, to Christmas  of thesame   year)  whom  I  see  over  the  shoulder  of  time  as  representing,mythologically,  Didactic Prose, Dramatic Poetry,  and  the Erotic Idyll. Mygrand-aunt, a dear  person with uncommonly liberal views,  gave in, however,to  domestic   considerations,  and  discharged  Cherry   Neaple,  my   lastshepherdess. After an  interlude of Russian and French pedagogy, two Englishtutors more or less <123> succeeded each other between 1912 and 1916, rathercomically  overlapping in  the  spring  of  1914 when  they competed for thefavors of a young  village beauty who had been my  girl in  the first place.English fairy tales had been replaced around 1910 by the B.O.P., immediatelyfollowed by  all the Tauchnitz volumes that  had  accumulated in  the familylibraries.  Throughout adolescence I read, in pairs, and  both with the samerich thrill, Othello and  Onegin, Tyutchev and Tennyson, Browning  and Blok.During my three Cambridge  years (1919-1922)  and thereafter, till April 23,1930, my  domestic tongue remained English, while the body of my own Russianworks started to grow and was soon to disorb my household gods.     So  far s o     g o o d .   B u t   t h e     p h r a s e     i t s e l f     i s     a     g l i b     c l i c h 8;   a n d   t h e  q u e s t i o n   c o n f r o n t i n g   m e   i n   P a r i s ,   i n     t h e   l a t e   T h i r t i e s ,   w a s   p r e c i s e l y   c o u l d  I     f i g h t     o f f     t h e     f o r m u l a   a n d   r i p     u p     t h e   r e a d y - m a d e ,     a n d   s w i t c h   f r o m   m y  g l o r i o u s   s e l f - d e v e l o p e d   R u s s i a n ,   n o t     to the dead leaden English of the highseas  with  dummies  in sailor  suits, but  an  English  I  alone  would  beresponsible for, in all its new ripples and changing light?     I  daresay the description  of my literary troubles will be  skipped bythe  common  reader; yet  for  my  sake,  rather than  his, I wish  to dwellmercilessly  on a  situation that was bad enough  before I left  Europe  butalmost killed me during the crossing.     Russian and English  had  existed for  years in my mind  as two  worldsdetached from one another. (It is only today that some interspatial  contacthas been established: "A knowledge of Russian," writes George Oakwood in hisastute essay on  my  Ardis,  1970,  "will help  you  to relish  much of  thewordplay  in the  most English of the author's  English novels; consider forinstance  this: `The champ and  the  chimp  came all the way  from  Omsk  toNeochomsk.'  What a delightful link  between a real  round  place and  <124>`ni-o-chyom,'  the About-Nothing land of modern philosophic linguistics!") Iwas  acutely  aware   of   the  syntactic  gulf  separating  their  sentencestructures.  I feared (unreasonably, as was to transpire eventually) that myallegiance to Russian grammar might interfere with an apostatical courtship.Take tenses: how different their elaborate and strict minuet in English fromthe free  and fluid  interplay between  the present and  the  past  in theirRussian  counterpart  (which Ian  Bunyan has so amusingly  compared in  lastSunday's NYT to "a dance of the veil performed by a plump graceful lady in acircle of cheering drunks").  The  fantastic number of natural-looking nounsthat the British and the Americans apply  in lovely technical senses to veryspecific objects also  distressed  me. What is the exact term for the littlecup  in which you place the diamond you want to cut?  (We call it "dop," thepupal  case of a butterfly, replied my informer, an old  Boston jeweler  whosold me the ring for my third bride). Is there not a nice special word for apigling?  ("I  am  toying with `snork' said  Professor  Noteboke,  the  besttranslator of  Gogol's immortal The  Carrick). I want the right word for thebreak in a boy's voice at puberty, I said to an  amiable opera  basso in theadjacent deck  chair during  my first  transatlantic  voyage. ("I  think, hesaid, "it's called  `ponticello,' a small bridge,  un  petit pont, mostik...Oh, you're Russian too?")     The traversal of my particular bridge ended, weeks after  landing, in acharming New York  apartment (it was leant  to Annette and me by  a generousrelative  of  mine and faced  the  sunset  flaming beyond Central Park). Theneuralgia in my  right  forearm was a gray adumbration compared to the solidblack headache that  no pill could pierce. Annette  rang up James Lodge, andhe,  out  of  the  misdirected  kindness  of his heart,  had  an  old littlephysician of Russian extraction examine me.  The  poor fellow  drove me evencrazier than I was by not only insisting on  discussing <125> my symptoms inan  execrable  version  of the  language  I  was  trying  to  shed,  but  ontranslating into it various irrelevant terms used by  the Viennese Quack andhis apostles (simbolizirovanie, mortidnik). Yet  his  visit, I must confess,strikes me in retrospect as a most artistic coda. <126>PART THREE     <127> <128>        1     Neither  Slaughter in the Sun  (as  the  English translation  of CameraLucida got retitled while I lay helplessly hospitalized in New York) nor TheRed Topper sold well. My  ambitious, beautiful, strange See under Real shonefor a breathless instant on the lowest rung of the bestseller list in a WestCoast paper,  and  vanished for  good.  In  those circumstances  I could notrefuse  the  lectureship  offered me  in 1940  by  Quirn  University on  thestrength of my European  reputation. I was to  develop a plump  tenure thereand  expand into a Full Professor by  1950 or 1955: I  can't  find the exactdate in my old notes.     Although  I  was adequately remunerated  for  my two weekly lectures onEuropean  Masterpieces  and one Thursday seminar on  Joyce's Ulysses (from ayearly  5000  dollars in  the  beginning to  15,000 in the Fifties)  and hadfurthermore several splendidly  paid stories accepted  by The  Beau and  theButterfly, the kindest magazine in the world, I was  not really  comfortableuntil my Kingdom by  the Sea (1962) atoned for a fraction of  the loss of myRussian fortune  (1917)  and bundled away all financial worries till the endof  worrisome time. I do not usually preserve cuttings of  adverse criticismand envious abuse; but I do treasure  the following definition: "This is theonly known case <129> in history when a European pauper ever became his  ownAmerican  uncle [amerikanskiy dyadyushka,  oncle d'Am                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               8r i q u e ] , "   s o   p h r a s e d   b y  m y   f a i t h f u l   Z o i l u s ,     D e m i a n     B a s i l e v s k i ;   h e   w a s   o n e     o f   t h e   v e r y   f e w     l a r g e r  s a u r i a n s   i n   t h e    m i g r    m a r s h e s   w h o   f o l l o w e d   m e   i n   1 9 3 9   t o   t h e   h o s p i t a b l e   a n d  a l t o g e t h e r     a d m i r a b l e   U . S . A . ,   w h e r e   w i t h   e g g - l a y i n g   p r o m p t n e s s   h e     f o u n d e d   a  R ussian-language  quarterly which  he is still directing today,  thirty-fiveyears later, in his heroic dotage.     The  furnished apartment  we finally rented  on the  upper  floor  of ahandsome  house  (10  Buffalo  St.)  was  much  to  my liking because of  anexceptionally  comfortable study  with  a  great bookcase  full of  works onAmerican lore including an  encyclopedia in twenty  volumes.  Annette  wouldhave preferred one of  the  dacha-like structures  which the  Administrationalso showed us; but she  gave in when  I pointed out to her that what lookedsnug and  quaint in summer  was bound to be chilly and weird the rest of theyear.     Annette's emotional health caused me anxiety:  her graceful neck seemedeven  longer  and thinner.  An  expression of mild melancholy  lent  a  new,unwelcome, beauty to her Botticellian face: its  hollowed  outline below thezygoma was accentuated by her increasing habit of sucking in her cheeks whenhesitative or pensive. All her cold petals remained closed in our infrequentlovemaking. Her abstraction grew perilous: stray cats at night knew that thesame erratic deity that had not shut the kitchen window would leave ajar thedoor of  the  fridge;  her  bath  regularly overflowed while she telephoned,knitting her  innocent brows (what on earth did she care  for  my  pains, mywelling insanity!), to  find  out  how the first-floor  person's migraine ormenopause was faring; and that vagueness  of hers in relation to me was alsoresponsible for her omitting a precaution she was  supposed to take, so thatby the autumn,  which followed  our moving into the  accursed  Langley <130>house, she  informed me  that  the doctor she had just  consulted looked thevery image of Oksman and that she was two-months pregnant.     An angel is now  waiting under my restless heels. Doomful despair wouldinvade my  poor Annette when  she tried to cope  with the  intricacies of anAmerican household. Our landlady, who occupied the first floor, resolved herperplexities in  a  jiffy.  Two  ravishing  wiggly-bottomed Bermudian coeds,wearing  their  national  costume,  flannel  shorts  and  open  shirts,  andpractically twins in  appearance, who took the celebrated "Hotel"  course atQuirn, came to cook and char for her, and she offered to share with us theirservices.     "She's a veritable  angel,"  confided Annette to me  in her  touchinglyphony English.     I recognized in the woman the Assistant Professor of Russian whom I hadmet in a brick building on the campus when the head of her remarkably drearydepartment, meek myopic old Noteboke, invited me to attend an Advanced GroupClass (My govorim  po-russki. Vy govorite? Pogovorimte togda--that  kind  ofawful stuff). Happily I had  no  connection whatever with Russian grammar atQuirn--except that my wife was eventually saved  from utter boredom by beingengaged to help beginners under Mrs. Langley's direction.     Ninel  Ilinishna Langley, a displaced  person  in more senses than one,had  recently  left her  husband, the  "great" Langley,  author of A MarxistHistory of America, the bible (now  out of print)  of a whole generation  ofmorons.  I  do not know the  reason  of their separation (after one year  ofAmerican Sex,  as the woman told Annette, who relayed the information to  mein a tone of idiotic condolence); but I  did have the occasion of seeing anddisliking Professor Langley  at  an  official  dinner  on  the  eve  of  hisdeparture for Oxford. I disliked him for his daring to  question my teachingUlysses  my way--in a purely textual <131> light, without organic allegoriesand quasi-Greek  myths and that  sort of tripe;  his "Marxism," on the otherhand,  was a pleasantly comic and very  mild  affair (too mild, perhaps, forhis wife's taste) compared to  the general  attitude of ignorant  admirationwhich American intellectuals had toward Soviet Russia. I remember the suddenhush, and furtive exchange of  incredulous grimaces, when at a  party, givenfor me by the most eminent member of our English department, I described theBolshevist   state  as  Philistine  in   repose  and   bestial  in   action;internationally vying in rapacious deceit with the praying mantis; doctoringthe mediocrity of  its literature by first sparing a few  talents left  overfrom a previous period and then blotting  them out with their own blood. Oneprofessor, a left-wing moralist and dedicated muralist (he was experimentingthat year with automobile paint), stalked out of the house. He wrote me nextday,  however, a  really magnificent,  larger-than-nature letter of  apologysaying that he could not be  really cross  with the author of Esmeralda  andHer Parandrus  (1941), which despite  its "motley style and baroque imagery"was  a masterpiece  "pinching strings  of personal  poignancy  which  he,  acommitted artist,  never  knew could vibrate in him." Reviewers of  my bookstook the same line, chiding me formally for underestimating  the "greatness"of Lenin, yet paying me compliments of a kind that could not  fail to touch,in  the long run, even me, a scornful and austere author, whose homework  inParis  had never  received  its  due.  Even  the  President  of  Quirn,  whotimorously sympathized with the  fashionable  Sovietizers, was really  on myside: he told me  when he called on us (while Ninel crept  up to grow an earon our landing) that he  was  proud,  etc., and had  found my "last (?) bookvery  interesting"  though he  could  not help regretting  that I took everyopportunity  of criticizing  "our Great  Ally"  in my classes.  I  answered,laughing, that this criticism was a child's  caress  when set alongside  thepublic lecture on <132> "The Tractor in Soviet Literature" that I planned todeliver at the  end  of the term. He laughed, too, and asked Annette what itwas like to live with a genius (she only shrugged her pretty shoulders). Allthis was tr                                                                                                                                                                                Es   a m 8r i c a i n   a n d   t h a w e d   a   w h o l e   a u r i c l e   i n   m y   i c y   h e a r t .            B u t   t o   r e t u r n   t o   g o o d   N i n e l .            S h e   h a d   b e e n     c h r i s t e n e d   N o n n a   a t   b i r t h   ( 1 9 0 2 )   a n d   r e n a m e d   t w e n t y   y e a r s  l a t e r   N i n e l   ( o r   N i n e l l a ) ,   a s   p e t i t i o n e d   b y   h e r     f a t h e r ,   a   H e r o   o f   T o i l   a n d   a  t o a d y .   S h e   wrote it Ninella in English but her friends called her Ninette orNelly just  as my  wife's  Christian  name Anna (as  Nonna liked to observe)turned into Annette and Netty.     Ninella Langley  was a stocky, heavily  built creature with a ruddy androsy  face  (the  two  tints  unevenly  distributed),  short  hair  dyed   amother-in-law  ginger,  brown eyes even madder  than mine, very thin lips, afat  Russian nose,  and  three or  four hairs on her chin. Before  the youngreader  heads for Lesbos, I wish to say that as far as I could discover (andI am a peerless spy) there was nothing sexual in her ludicrous and unlimitedaffection for  my wife. I had  not yet acquired the white  Desert Lynx  thatAnnette did not  live to  see, so it was Ninella who took  her shopping in adilapidated  jalopy while the resourceful lodger,  sparing the copies of hisown novels, would autograph for the  grateful twins  old mystery  paperbacksand unreadable pamphlets  from  the  Langley  collection in the  attic whosedormer looked out obligingly on the road to, and  from, the Shopping Center.It was Ninella who kept her adored "Netty" well supplied with white knittingwool. It was Ninella who twice daily invited her  for a cup of coffee or teain her rooms; but the woman made a point of avoiding our flat, at least whenwe were at home, under  the  pretext that  it still  reeked of her husband'stobacco: I rejoined that it  was my  own  pipe--and  later, on the same day,Annette told me I really ought not to smoke so much, especially indoors; andshe  also upheld  another  absurd <133>  complaint  coming from  downstairs,namely, that I walked back  and forth  too  late and  too  long,  right overNinella's forehead. Yes--and  a third  grievance:  why didn't I put back theencyclopedia volumes in alphabetic  order as  her  husband had  always  beencareful to  do,  for  (he said) "a  misplaced book is a lost book"--quite anaphorism.     Dear Mrs. Langley was not particularly happy about her job. She owned alakeside bungalow ("Rustic Roses") thirty miles north of Quirn, not very farfrom  Honeywell College, where she taught summer school  and  with which sheintended to be even more  closely associated, if  a "reactionary" atmospherepersisted at  Quirn. Actually, her only  grudge was against decrepit Mme. deKorchakov, who had accused  her,  in public, of having  a sdobnyy ("mellow")Soviet accent and a provincial vocabulary--all of which could not be denied,although Annette maintained I was a heartless bourgeois to say so. <134>2     The infant Isabel's first four years of life are so firmly separated inmy consciousness by a blank of seven years from Bel's girlhood that  I  seemto have had two different children, one a cheerful red-cheeked little thing,and the other her pale and morose elder sister.     I had laid in a stock  of ear plugs; they proved superfluous: no cryingcame  from the nursery to interfere with my work--Dr. Olga Repnin, the storyof  an  invented  Russian professor in America,  which was  to  be published(after a bothersome spell  of serialization entailing endless  proofreading)by  Lodge in 1946, the year Annette  left  me, and acclaimed as  "a blend ofhumor and humanism" by alliteration-prone reviewers,  comfortably unaware ofwhat  I  was  to  prepare  some  fifteen  years  later  for their  horrifieddelectation.     I enjoyed watching Annette as  she took color snapshots of the baby andme  in  the garden. I loved  perambulating a fascinated  Isabel through, thegroves of larches and beeches along  Quirn Cascade River, with every loop oflight, every  eyespot of  shade escorted, or so it seemed, by the baby's gayapprobation. I even  agreed  to spend  most of the summer  of 1945 at RusticRoses. There, one day, as I was returning with Mrs. Langley from the nearestliquor <135>  store or newspaper stand, something  she said, some intonationor gesture, released in me  the passing shudder, the awful surmise,  that itwas not with my wife but with me that the wretched creature had been in lovefrom the very start.     The torturous  tenderness  I  had  always  felt  for Annette gained newpoignancy from my feelings for  our little child (I "trembled" over  her  asNinella put  it in her coarse  Russian, complaining it might be bad  for thebaby, even if one  "subtracted the overacting"). That was the human  side ofour marriage. The sexual side disintegrated altogether.     For  quite a time after her return  from the maternity  ward, echoes ofher  pangs in  the darkest corridors of  my brain and a  frightening stainedwindow at every  turn--the afterimage of  a wounded orifice--pursued  me anddeprived me  of all my vigor. When everything in me healed, and my  lust forher pale enchantments  rekindled, its volume and violence  put an end to thebrave but essentially inept  efforts she had been making to reestablish somesort  of  amorous harmony  between  us without departing  one jot  from  thepuritanical norm. She  now had the gall--the pitiful girlish gall--to insistI  see a  psychiatrist (recommended  by Mrs. Langley) who would  help me  tothink "softening"  thoughts  at moments of excessive engorgement. I said herfriend was a monster and  she a goose, and we had our worst  marital quarrelin years.     The creamy-thighed twins had long since returned with their bicycles tothe  island of  their birth.  Plainer  young  ladies came  to  help with thehousekeeping.  By the end of 1945 I had virtually ceased visiting my wife inher cold bedroom.     Sometime  in mid-May, 1946, I traveled to  New  York--a five-hour traintrip--to lunch  with a publisher  who was  offering  me  better  terms for acollection of stories (Exile  from  Mayda) than good Lodge. After a pleasantmeal, in the sunny haze of that banal day, I walked over to the <136> PublicLibrary, and by a  banal miracle  of synchronization  she came dancing  downthose very  steps, Dolly von Borg, now  twenty-four, as I  trudged up towardher, a fat famous writer in his powerful forties. Except for a gleam of grayin the  abundant fair  mane that I had cultivated  for my readings in Paris,more than  a decade ago, I do not believe I  could have changed sufficientlyto  warrant  her  saying, as she began  doing,  that  she  would  never haverecognized me had she not been so fond of the picture  of meditation on  theback of See under. I  recognized  her because I had never lost track  of herimage, readjusting it once in a while: the last time I had notched the scorewas when her grandmother, in  response to my wife's  Christmas greetings, in1939, sent us from London a postcard-size photo of a bare-shouldered flapperwith  a fluffy fan and  false eyelashes  in some high-school  play, terriblychi-chi. In the two minutes we had  on  those steps--she  pressing with bothhands a book  to her breast, I at a lower level, standing with my right footplaced on the next step, her step, and slapping my knee with a glove (many atenor's  only  known gesture)--in those  two minutes we managed to  exchangequite a lot of plain information.     She was now studying the History of the Theater at Columbia University.Parents and  grandparents were tucked away in London.  I had a child, right?Those shoes I  wore were lovely. Students called my lectures fabulous. Was Ihappy?     I shook my head. When and where could I see her?     She had  always  had a crush  on me,  oh  yes,  ever  since I  used  tomesmerize her in my  lap, playing sweet  Uncle Gasper, muffing  every  otherline, and now all had come  back and she  certainly wished  to do  somethingabout it.     She  had a remarkable vocabulary. Summarize her. Mirages of  motels  inthe eye of the penholder. Did she have a car?     Well, that  was  rather  sudden  (laughing).  She could  <137>  borrow,perhaps,  his old sedan though he might  not like the  notion (pointing to anondescript  youth who was  waiting for  her  on the  sidewalk). He had justbought a heavenly Hummer to go places with her.     Would she mind telling me when we could meet, please.     She had read all my novels, at  least all the English ones. Her Russianwas rusty!     The hell with my novels! When?     I had  to  let her think. She  might visit me at the end  of the  term.Terry Todd (now measuring the stairs  with his eyes, preparing to mount) hadbriefly been a student  of  mine; he got a D  minus for his first paper  andquit Quirn.     I said I consigned  all  the D people to everlasting oblivion. Her "endof the term" might bend away into Minus Eternity. I required more precision.     She would let  me know. She would call me next  week. No, she would notpart with her own telephone  number. She  told me to look at that  clown (hewas now  coming up  the steps).  Paradise was a Persian word.  It was simplyPersian  to meet  again like that. She might drop in at  my office for a fewmoments, just to chat about old times. She knew how busy--     "Oh, Terry:  this is  the  writer, the man  who wrote  Emerald and  thePander."     I do not recall what I had planned to look up in  the library. Whateverit was, it was not that unknown book. Aimlessly I walked up and down severalhalls; abjectly visited  the W.C.; but simply could not, short of castratingmyself, get rid of her new image in its own portable sunlight--the  straightpale hair,  the freckles, the  banal pout,  the Lilithan long eyes--though Iknew she  was only  what one  used  to  call a "little tramp"  and, perhaps,because she was just that.     I gave my penultimate "Masterpieces" lecture of the spring term. I gavemy ultimate one. An assistant distributed <138> the blue books for the finalexamination in that course (which I had curtailed for reasons of health) andcollected them  while three or four  hopeless hopefuls still kept scribblingmadly in  separate spots of the  hall.  I  held my last Joyce seminar of theyear. Little Baroness Borg had forgotten the end of the dream.     In the last  days of the spring  term a particularly stupid baby-sittertold me  that  some girl  whose name  she had not  quite caught--Tallbird orDalberg--had phoned that she was  on her way to Quirn. It so happened that aLily Talbot  in  my Masterpieces class  had missed the  examination. On  thefollowing  day I  walked  over to  my office  for the ordeal of  reading thedamned  heap on  my desk.  Quirn University  Official Examination Book.  Allacademic work is conducted on the assumption of general horror. Write on theconsecutive right- and left-hand pages. What does "consecutive" really mean,Sir? Do you want us to describe all the birds in the story or only one? As arule, one-tenth of the three hundred minds preferred the spelling "Stern" to"Sterne" and "Austin" to "Austen."     The telephone on my spacious desk (it "slept two" as my ribald neighborProfessor King, an  authority on Dante, used  to say)  rang, and  this  LilyTalbot  started to explain,  volubly, unconvincingly, in  a kind  of lovely,veiled, and  confidential  voice, why  she had not taken the examination.  Icould not  remember her face or her figure,  but the subdued melody ticklingmy ear contained such intimations  of young charm and surrender that I couldnot help chiding  myself  for overlooking her in my class. She was  about tocome to  the  point  when an eager  childish rap  at the  door  diverted  myattention. Dolly walked in, smiling. Smiling,  she indicated with  a tilt ofher  chin  that  the  receiver  should be cradled.  Smiling, she  swept  theexamination books off the desk and perched upon it with her bare shins in myface. What might have promised the most refined ardors turned out to be  thetritest scene in this memoir. I hastened <139> to quench  a thirst  that hadbeen burning  a  hole  in the mixed metaphor  of my  life ever  since I  hadfondled  a quite  different  Dolly  thirteen  years  earlier.  The  ultimateconvulsion rocked the desk lamp, and from the class just across the corridorcame a burst of applause at the end of Professor  King's last lecture of theseason.     When I came home, I found my wife alone on the porch swinging gently ifnot quite straight  in  her  favorite glider  and reading the  Krasnaya Niva("Red Corn"), a  Bolshevist magazine.  Her  purveyor of  literatura was awaygiving  some future  mistranslators a final examination. Isabel had been outof doors and was now taking a nap in her room just above the porch.     In the days when the bermudki (as Ninella  indecently called them) usedto  minister to my humble needs, I experienced no guilt after the  operationand confronted my wife with  my  usual, fondly  ironical smile;  but on thisoccasion I felt my flesh coated  with stinging slime, and  my heart missed athump,  when  she said, glancing up  and  stopping the line with her finger:"Did that girl get in touch with you at your office?"     I  answered as a  fictional  character might "in the affirmative": "Herpeople," I  added, "wrote you, it appears, about  her coming to study in NewYork, but  you never showed me  that  letter. Tant mieux, she's  a frightfulbore."     Annette looked  utterly confused:  "I'm speaking," she said, "or tryingto speak, about a student called Lily Talbot  who telephoned an hour ago  toexplain why she missed the exam. Who is your girl?"     We proceeded to disentangle the two. After some moral  hesitation ("Youknow, we  both owe a  lot to her grandparents")  Annette conceded we  reallyneed not entertain little strays. She seemed to recall the letter because itcontained a reference to her widowed mother (now moved to a comfortable homefor the old into which I had recently turned  my villa at Carnavaux--despitemy  <140> lawyer's  well-meaning  objections). Yes,  yes,  she  had  mislaidit--and would  find  it some  day in some  library  book that had never beenreturned to  an unattainable library.  A strange appeasement was now flowingthrough my poor veins. The romance of  her  absentmindedness always  made melaugh  heartily.  I  laughed  heartily.  I  kissed  her  on  her  infinitelytender-skinned temple.     "How does Dolly Borg look now?"  asked Annette. "She  used to be a veryhomely and very brash little brat. Quite repulsive, in fact."     "That's what she still is," I practically shouted, and  we heard littleIsabel crow:  "Ya prosnulas'"  through the yawn of the window: "I am awake."How  lightly  the spring cloudlets  scudded!  How  glibly  that red-breastedthrush on the lawn pulled out its unbroken worm! Ah--and  there was Ninella,home at  last,  getting out  of  her car,  with the string-bound  corpses ofcahiers  under  her  sturdy  arm. "Gosh," said  I to  myself, in  my ignobleeuphoria, "there's something quite nice and cozy about old Ninel after all!"Yet only a few hours later the light of Hell had gone out, and  I writhed, Iwrung my four limbs,  yes, in an  agony of insomnia,  trying  to  find  somecombination between  pillow and back, sheet and  shoulder, linen and leg, tohelp me, help me, oh, help me to reach the Eden of a rainy dawn. <141>3     The  increasing  disarray  of  my  nerves  was such  that the bother ofgetting a driver's license could not be contemplated: hence I had to rely onDolly's use  of Todd's  dirty old sedan  in  order to seek  the conventionaldarkness of country lanes that were difficult to find and disappointing whenfound. We had three  such rendezvous, near New Swivington or thereabouts, inthe complicated vicinity of Casanovia of all places, and despite my  muddledcondition  I  could  not  help  noticing that Dolly  welcomed  the  restlesswanderings, the wrong turns, the torrents of rain which  attended our sordidlittle  affair. "Just think," she  said one  especially boggy June  night inunknown  surroundings,  "how  much  simpler  things  would  be  if  somebodyexplained the situation to your wife, just think!"     On realizing  she had gone  too far with that proposed  thought,  Dollychanged tactics and rang me up  at my office to tell me with a great show ofjubilant excitement  that  Bridget Dolan, a medical student and a  cousin ofTodd's, was  offering us for  a small remuneration her flat in New  York  onMonday  and Thursday  afternoons when  she worked  as a  nurse  at the  HolySomething Hospital. Inertia  rather than  Eros caused me to give it a try; Ikept up the pretext of having to complete the  literary <142> research I wassupposed to  be conducting in  the Public Library, and traveled in a crowdedPullman from one nightmare to another.     She met me in front of the house, strutting  in triumph, brandishing  alittle key that caught a glint of  sun in the hothouse mizzle. I was so veryweak from the journey that I had trouble getting  out of  the taxi,  and shehelped  me  to the front  door, chattering the  while  like a bright  child.Fortunately the  mysterious  flat was on the ground floor--I could not  havefaced a lift's closure and spasm. A surly janitrix (reminding me in mnemonicreverse of the Cerberean bitches in the hotels of Soviet Siberia which I wasto stop at a couple of decades later)  insisted on my writing down  my  nameand address in a ledger ("That's the rule," sang out Dolly, who  had alreadypicked up some intones of local delivery). I had the presence of mind to putdown the dumbest address I could  produce  at the  moment,  Dumbert Dumbert,Dumberton. Dolly, humming, added unhurriedly my raincoat to those hanging ina communal hallway.  If  she  had  ever  experienced  the pangs of neuralgicdelirium, she would not have fumbled with that key when  she knew quite wellthat the door of what should  have been an exquisitely private apartment wasnot even properly closed. We  entered a preposterous, evidently ultra-modernliving  room  with  painted hard furniture and one lone little white  rockersupporting a plush biped rat instead of a sulky child. Doors were still withme, were always with me. The one  on the left, being  slightly ajar, let  invoices from an adjacent suite or asylum. "There's a party going on there!" Iexpostulated, and  Dolly  deftly  and  softly  drew  that door  almost shut."They're a nice friendly  group," she  said,  "and it's really too  warm  inthese rooms to choke every chink. Second on the right. Here we are."     Here  we were. Nurse  Dolan for the sake of atmosphere and professionalempathy had rigged up her bedroom in hospital  style: a snow-pure cot with asystem  of levers <143>  that would have rendered even Big Peter (in the RedTopper) impotent; whitewashed commodes and glazed  cabinets; a bedhead chartdear to humorists; and a set of rules tacked to the bathroom door.     "Now  off  with that jacket," cried Dolly gaily, "while I  unlace thoselovely shoes" (crouching  nimbly, and  nimbly  recrouching, at my retreatingfeet).     I  said: "You have  lost  your  mind, my  dear,  if you think  I  couldcontemplate making love in this appalling place."     "What do you want  then?" she asked, angrily brushing away a  strand ofhair from her flushed face and uncoiling back to  her natural length: "Wherewould you find another such dandy, hygienic, utterly--"     A  visitor interrupted her:  a brown, gray-cheeked  old dackel carryinghorizontally a rubber bone in  its mouth. It entered from the parlor, placedthe obscene red thing on the linoleum, and stood looking at me, at Dolly, atme again,  with  melancholy  expectation on  its  raised dogface.  A  prettybare-armed girl in black slipped in, grabbed the animal, kicked its toy backinto the parlor, and  said: "Hullo, Dolly! If you and your  friend want somedrinks afterwards, please join  us. Bridget phoned she'd be home early. It'sJ.B.'s birthday."     "Righto,  Carmen,"  replied  Dolly,  and  turning  to  me continued  inRussian: "I think you need that drink right  away.  Oh, come  along! And forGod's  sake leave  that  jacket and  waistcoat  here.  You are drenched withsweat."     She forced me out of the room; I went rumbling and groaning; she gave aperfunctory pat to the creaseless cot and followed the man of snow,  the manof tallow, the dying lopsided man.     Most  of the party  had  now invaded the parlor from  the next  room. Icringed and tried to hide my face as I recognized Terry Todd. He  raised hisglass  in  delicate  congratulation. What  that  slut had done to  ensure  athwarted beau's complicity, I shall never know; but I should  never have put<144>  her  in  my  Krasnyy  Tsilindr;  that's  the  way   you  breed   livemonsters--from little ballerinas  in books. Another person  I had  once seenalready--in a car  that kept passing us somewhere  in  the  country--a youngactor  with  handsome  Irish  features,  pressed  upon me  what he  called aHonolulu Cooler, but at  the eoan stage of an attack I am beyond alcohol, socould  only  taste the  pineapple  part of the mixture. Amidst  a  circle ofsycophants a bull-size old  fellow  in  a  short-sleeved  shirt  monogrammed"J.B." posed, one  hairy arm around Dolly, for  a naughty shot that his wifesnapped. Carmen removed my sticky  glass  on her  neat  little  tray with  apillbox and a thermometer in the corner.  Not finding a  seat, I had to leanagainst the  wall,  and  the back of my head  caused  a cheap abstract in  aplastic frame to start  swinging above me:  it was  stopped by Todd  who hadsidled up to me and now  said,  lowering  his voice: "Everything is settled.Prof, to  everybody's  satisfaction.  I've kept in  touch with Mrs. Langley,sure I have, she and the missus  are writing you.  I believe they've alreadyleft, the kid thinks you're in Heaven--now, now, what's the matter?"     I  am  not a fighter. I only hurt my hand against  a tall lamp and lostboth shoes in the  scuffle. Terry  Todd vanished--forever. The telephone wasbeing used in one room and ringing in the other. Dolly, retransformed by thealchemy of her blazing anger--and now untellable  from  the little girl  whohad hurled a three-letter French word at me when I told her I found it wiserto stop taking advantage of her grandfather's hospitality--virtually tore mynecktie  in two, yelling  she  could  easily  get  me  jailed for  rape  butpreferred  to see me crawling back  to my consort  and harem of baby-sitters(her new  vocabulary, though, remained  richly  theatrical,  even  when  sheshrieked).     I felt trapped like a silver pea teased into the center of  a toy maze.A threatening crowd, held back by J.B., the  head doctor, separated  me fromthe exit; so I retreated to <145> Bridget's private wardette and saw, with asense  of relief (also  "eoan"  alas)  that beyond a  previously  unnoticed,half-opened  French  window there  extended to a fabulous distance  an innercourt, or  only one comforting part  of an  inner court, with lightly  robedpatients circulating in  a  geometry of lawns and  garden walks, or  quietlysitting on benches. I staggered out, and as my white-socked feet touched thecool  turf I noticed that the vagabond wench had undone the ankle strings ofthe long linen underpants I was  wearing. Somehow, somewhere, I had shed andlost all the rest of my clothes. As I stood there, my  head  brimming with ablackness  of pain seldom known before, I became aware of a flurry of motionbeyond the court. Far, far away, nurse Dolan or Nolan (at that distance suchnice distinctions no longer  mattered) emerged from a  wing  of the hospitaland came running  to my assistance. Two males followed her with a stretcher.A helpful patient gathered up the blanket they had dropped.     "You know, you know . . .  you should have never done  that," she criedpanting. "Don't move, they'll  help you to get  up (I  had  collapsed on theturf).  If you'd escaped after surgery you  might have  died right where youare. On such a lovely day, too!"     And so I was  carried by two sturdy palanquiners who stank all  the way(the hind bearer solidly, the front man in  rhythmic wafts) not to Bridget'sbed but to a real hospital cot in a ward for three between two old men, bothdying of cerebritis. <146>4     Rustic Roses     13. IV. 46     The  step  I  have  taken,  Vadim,  is not  subject  to discussion  (nepodlezhit  obsuzhdeniyu). You must accept my departure  as a fait accompli. HYPERLINK "http://rok.kulichki.ru/moshkow/NABOKOW/arlekiny_engl.txt" \l "fn_5_1" 1Had  I really loved  you  I would not have  left  you; but I never loved youreally, and maybe  your escapade--which no doubt is not your first since ourarrival in this sinister (zloveshchuyu)  "free"  country" HYPERLINK "http://rok.kulichki.ru/moshkow/NABOKOW/arlekiny_engl.txt" \l "fn_5_2" 2--is for me a merepretext for leaving you.     We have  never been very  happy together, you and I, during our twelve HYPERLINK "http://rok.kulichki.ru/moshkow/NABOKOW/arlekiny_engl.txt" \l "fn_5_3" 3years of marriage.  You regarded  me from the start as a  cute, dutiful, butdefinitely  disappointing  little circus  animal HYPERLINK "http://rok.kulichki.ru/moshkow/NABOKOW/arlekiny_engl.txt" \l "fn_5_4" 4  which  you tried to teachimmoral  disgusting tricks--condemned  as  such  according  to  the faithfulcompanion without whom I might not have survived in  ghastly "Kvirn" HYPERLINK "http://rok.kulichki.ru/moshkow/NABOKOW/arlekiny_engl.txt" \l "fn_5_5" 5 by thelatest scientific  stars of  our fatherland. I, on the  other hand,  was  sopainfully  nonplussed  by  your  trenne  (sic) HYPERLINK "http://rok.kulichki.ru/moshkow/NABOKOW/arlekiny_engl.txt" \l "fn_5_6" 6 de  vie, your  habits,  yourblack-locked HYPERLINK "http://rok.kulichki.ru/moshkow/NABOKOW/arlekiny_engl.txt" \l "fn_5_7" 7 friends, your decadent novels,  and--why  not admit  it?--your<147>  pathological revolt  against Art  and Progress in  the  Soviet  Land,including the  restoration  of  lovely  old  churches, HYPERLINK "http://rok.kulichki.ru/moshkow/NABOKOW/arlekiny_engl.txt" \l "fn_5_8" 8  that I  would  havedivorced you, had  I  dared upset HYPERLINK "http://rok.kulichki.ru/moshkow/NABOKOW/arlekiny_engl.txt" \l "fn_5_9" 9  poor papa and mama  who were so eager intheir  dignity and  na                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     >v e t 8  t o   h a v e   t h e i r   d a u g h t e r   a d d r e s s e d - - b y     w h o m ,   g o o d  L o r d ? - - a s   " Y o u r   S e r e n i t y "   ( S i y a t e l ' s t v o ) .            N o w     c o m e s     a     s e r i o u s   d e m a n d ,   a n   a b s o l u t e   i n j u n c t i o n .   N e v e r ,   n e v e r - - a t  l e a s t   w h i l e   I   a m   s t i l l   a l i v e - - n e v e r ,   I   r e p e a t ,   s h a l l     y o u   t r y   t o   c o m m u n i c a t e  w i t h    the child. I  do not  know--Nelly is better  versed in this--what  thelegal situation is, but I know that in certain respects you  are a gentlemanand it is to the  gentleman that I say and shout: Please, please, keep away!If some dreadful American illness strikes me, then remember I wish her to bebrought up as a Russian Christian. HYPERLINK "http://rok.kulichki.ru/moshkow/NABOKOW/arlekiny_engl.txt" \l "fn_5_10" 10     I was sorry to learn about  your hospitalization. This  is your second,and I hope last, attack of neurasthenia HYPERLINK "http://rok.kulichki.ru/moshkow/NABOKOW/arlekiny_engl.txt" \l "fn_5_11" 11 since the time we made the mistakeof leaving Europe instead of waiting quietly for the Soviet Army to liberateit from the fascists. Good-bye.     PS. Nelly wishes to add a few lines.     Thank you, Netty. I shall indeed be brief.  The information imparted tous  by  your girl-friend's  fianc  and  his  mother, HYPERLINK "http://rok.kulichki.ru/moshkow/NABOKOW/arlekiny_engl.txt" \l "fn_5_12" 12  a  saintly woman ofinfinite compassion and  common  sense, lacked, fortunately, the  element ofdreadful surprise. A  roommate  of  Berenice Mudie  (the one that stole  thecut-crystal decanter Netty  gave me) had  already been spreading certain oddrumors a couple of years ago;  I tried to protect  your sweet  wife <148> bynot allowing that gossip to reach  her or at least by drawing  her attentionto it in a very oblique, half-humorous way long after those prostitutes  hadgone. But now let us talk turkey. HYPERLINK "http://rok.kulichki.ru/moshkow/NABOKOW/arlekiny_engl.txt" \l "fn_5_13" 13     There can  be  no problem, I am sure, in  separating your  things  fromhers. She says: "Let him take the countless copies of his novels and all thetattered  dictionaries";  but  she must  be allowed to  keep  her  householdtreasures such  as my little birthday gifts to her--the silver-plated caviarbowl as well as the six pale-green handblown wine glasses, etc.     I can especially sympathize  with  Netty in  this  domestic catastrophebecause  my own  marriage resembled  hers in many, many  ways.  It began  soauspiciously!  I was stranded and lost in a territory suddenly  occupied  byEstonian fascists, a poor little war-tossed Moscow girl, HYPERLINK "http://rok.kulichki.ru/moshkow/NABOKOW/arlekiny_engl.txt" \l "fn_5_14" 14 when I first  metProfessor Langley  in quite romantic circumstances:  I was interpreting  forhim  (the study of foreign  languages  stands  at a remarkable  level in theSoviet Land), but when I was shipped with other  DP's to the UK, and we  metagain and  married,  all went  wrong--he ignored me in  the daytime, and ournights  were  full of  incompatibility. HYPERLINK "http://rok.kulichki.ru/moshkow/NABOKOW/arlekiny_engl.txt" \l "fn_5_15" 15  One  good  consequence is that  Iinherited, so to speak,  a lawyer, Mr.  Horace Peppermill, who has consentedto grant you a consultation and  help you to settle all business details. Itwill be  wise  on your part to  follow Professor Langley's example and  giveyour wife a monthly allowance while placing a sizable "guarantee sum" in thebank which can be available to her in  extreme  cases and, naturally,  afteryour demise  or during  an overprotracted terminal illness. We do not  <149>have to remind you that Mrs.  Blagovo should  continue to  receive regularlyher usual check until further notice.     The Quirn house will be offered for sale immediately--it is overflowingwith odious memories. Consequently, as  soon as  they let you  out, which  Ihope will happen without retardment (bez zamedleniya, sans tarder), move outof  the  house,  please. HYPERLINK "http://rok.kulichki.ru/moshkow/NABOKOW/arlekiny_engl.txt" \l "fn_5_16" 16 I  am  not  on  speaking  terms with  Miss  MyrnaSoloway--or,  in  reality,  simply  Soloveychik--of  my  department,  but  Iunderstand she is very good at ferreting out places for rent.     We have fine weather here after all that rain. The lake is beautiful atthis time of the year! We are going to refurnish our dear little  dacha. Itsonly drawback in one sense (an asset in all others!) is that it stands a weebit apart  from civilization or at least from Honeywell College.  The policeare  always on the  lockout for  bothers  in the nude, prowlers, etc. We areseriously thinking of acquiring a big Alsatian! HYPERLINK "http://rok.kulichki.ru/moshkow/NABOKOW/arlekiny_engl.txt" \l "fn_5_17" 17COMMENTARY     * 1.     En fran                                                               3a i s   d a n s   l e   t e x t e .            *   2 .            T h e     f i r s t     f o u r     o r   f i v e   l i n e s   a r e     n o   d o u b t     a u t h e n t i c ,   b u t   t h e n   c o m e  v a r i o u s   d e t a i l s   w h i c h   c o n v i n c e   m e   t h a t   n o t   N e t t y   b u t     N e l l y   m a s t e r m i n d e d   t h e  e n t i r e   c o m m u n i c a t i o n .   O n l y   a   S o v i e t   w o m a n   w o u l d   s p e a k   l i k e   t h a t   o f   A m e r i ca.     * 3.     At first typed  "fourteen"  but  expertly  erased  and replaced by  thecorrect "twelve," as seen clearly in  the carbon copy that I  found  pinned,"just  in case," to the  blotter in my study. Netty  would have been totallyincapable  of  producing such a  clean  typescript--especially with  the NewOrthography machine used by her friend.     * 4.     The term  in the  text is  durovskiy zveryok,  meaning  a small  animaltrained by  the  famous Russian clown Durov, a reference <150> less familiarto my wife than to a person  of the  older  generation  to  which her friendbelonged.     * 5.     Contemptuous transliteration of "Quirn."     * 6.     Symptomatic  misspelling  of  train.  Annette's French  was  excellent.Ninette's French (as well as her English) was a joke.     * 7.     My wife  coming  as  she  did from an  obscurant  Russian milieu was noparagon of  racial  tolerance;  but  she  would  never  have used the vulgaranti-Semitic phraseology typical of her friend's character and upbringing.     * 8.     The interpolation of those  "lovely old  churches" is a stock platitudeof Soviet patriotism.     * 9.     Actually my wife rather  liked  to  upset her  people on every possibleoccasion.     * 10.     I might have done something about it had I known for sure whose wish itwas.   To  spite  her   parents--a  strange  but  constant  policy  on   herpart--Annette never went to church, not even at Easter. As  to Mrs. Langley,devotional decorum was the motto; the woman made the sign of the cross everytime American Jupiter split the black clouds.     * 11.     "Neurasthenia" indeed!     * 12.     A totally new character--this mother. Myth? Impersonation act? I turnedto Bridget for  some explanation; she  said there was no such person  around(the real Mrs. Todd died long ago) and advised me "to drop the subject" withthe irritating  curtness  of  one  dismissing  a  topic as  the  product  ofanother's delirium. I am ready to agree that my recollection of the scene ather  apartment is tainted by the state I  was in,  but that "saintly mother"must remain an enigma.     * 13.     En Anglais dans le texte.     * 14.     The little Muscovite must have been around forty at the time.     * 15.     En Anglais dans le texte.     * 16.     This I did not dream of doing before  my lease expired, which it did onAugust 1, 1946.     * 17.     Let us refrain from a final comment.     Good-bye, Netty and  Nelly. Good-bye, Annette  and  Ninette.  Good-bye,Nonna Ann a .   < 1 5 1 >   < 1 5 2 >      P A R T   F O U R             < 1 5 3 >   < 1 5 4 >                  1             L e a r n i n g     t o     d r i v e   t h a t   " C a r a c a l "     ( a s   I   f o n d l y   c a l l e d     m y     n e w     w h i t e  c o u p 8)     h a d   i t s   c o m i c   a s   w e l l   a s   d r a m a t i c   s i d e ,   b a t   a f t e r   t w o     f l u n k s   a n d     a  f e w     l i t t l e     r e p a i r s ,   I   f o u n d   m y s e l f   l e g a l l y and  physically  fit at last tospin off  West on  a  protracted tour. There  was, true,  a  moment of acutedistress, as the first  distant mountains disowned suddenly any likeness  tolilac clouds, when I recalled  the  trips  Iris  and I  used to  make to theRiviera  in  our old Icarus.  If  she did  occasionally allow me to take thewheel, it was only in a  spirit of fun, for  she was such a  sportive  girl.With what sobs I now remembered the time when I managed to hit the postman'sbicycle which had  been left leaning against a pink wall at  the entrance ofCarnavaux,  and how my Iris  doubled  up in  beautiful  mirth  as the  thingslithered off in front of us!     I spent what remained of the  summer exploring  the  incredibly lyricalRocky Mountain states, getting drunk  on whiffs of  Oriental  Russia  in thesagebrush zone and on the North Russian fragrances  so faithfully reproducedabove timberline by  certain  small bogs  along trickles of sky between  thesnowbank and the orchid.  And  yet--was that all?  What  form  of mysteriouspursuit  caused me  to get my feet wet like  a child, to pant up a talus, tostare <155>  every  dandelion in the  face, to start  at every  colored motepassing just beyond  my field of  vision?  What was the dream  sensation  ofhaving  come  empty-handed--without what? A  gun? A  wand?  This I dared notprobe lest I wound the raw fell under my thin identity.     Skipping the academic year,  in a  kind of premature "sabbatical leave"that left the Trustees of Quirn University speechless, I wintered in Arizonawhere I tried to write The Invisible Lath, a book rather similar  to that inthe reader's hands. No doubt I  was not ready for it and  perhaps foiled toomuch over inexpressible shades of emotion;  anyway I  smothered it under toomany layers of  sense as a  Russian peasant  woman, in her stuffy log house,might overlay (zaspat') her baby in heavy oblivion after making hay or beingthrashed by her drunken husband.     I  pushed on  to Los  Angeles--and was sorry to  learn  that the cinemacompany I had counted upon was about to fold after Ivor Black's death. On myway  back,  in  early  spring,  I rediscovered  the  dear phantasmata  of mychildhood  in the tender green of  aspen groves at high altitudes  here  andthere, on conifer-clothed ridges. For almost  six months I roamed again frommotel  to motel,  several times  having  my  car scratched  and  cracked  bycretinous  rival drivers and  finally  trading it  in for a sedate Bellargussedan of a celestial blue that Bel was to compare with that of a Morpho.     Another odd thing:  with  prophetic care I took down in my diary all mystops,  all  my  motels  (Mes  Moteaux  as  Verlaine might  have said!), theLakeviews, the Valley Views, the Mountain Views, the Plumed Serpent Court inNew Mexico, the Lolita Lodge in Texas, Lone Poplars, that if recruited mighthave patrolled a whole river, and enough sunsets to keep all the bats of theworld--and one dying genius--happy. LATH, LATH, Look At The Harlequins! Lookat that strange fever rash of  viatic tabulation in which I persevered as ifI  knew that those <156> motor  courts  prefigured  the stages  of my futuretravels with my darling daughter.     In late August, 1947, suntanned, and more edgy than ever, I returned toQuirn and  transferred my  belongings  from  storage to the new dwelling  (1Larchdell Road) found for  me by efficient and cute Miss Soloway. This was acharming two-storied gray-stone house, with a picture  window  and  a  whitegrand  in  the  long  drawing-room,  three virginal bedrooms upstairs and  alibrary in the  basement.  It had  belonged to the late Alden  Landover, thegreatest  American  belle-lettrist of the half-century. With the help of thebeaming  Trustees--and rather taking advantage of their joy at welcoming  meback to Quirn--I  resolved to buy  that house. I loved its scholarly odor, atreat seldom granted  to my  exquisitely sensitive Brunn's membrane,  and  Ialso loved  its picturesque  isolation amidst  a  tremendous  unkempt gardenabove a larched and golden-rodded steep slope.     To  keep Quirn grateful, I also decided  to  reorganize  completely  mycontribution to  its fame. I  scrapped my  Joyce  seminar which in  1945 hadattracted (if that  is  the word) only six students--five grim graduates andone not quite normal sophomore.  In compensation I added a third lecture  inMasterpieces  (now  including  Ulysses)  to  my  weekly  quota.  The   chiefinnovation,  however,  lay  in  my bold presentation of knowledge. During myfirst  years at  Quirn  I  had  accumulated two thousand  pages  of literarycomments typed out by my assistant (I nonce I  have not introduced him  yet:Waldemar Exkul, a brilliant young Balt, incomparably  more learned  than  I;dixi, Ex!).  These  I had  the  Photostat people multiply to  accommodate atleast three hundred students. At the end of every week each received a batchof the forty pages that I had recited to them, with certain addenda,  in thelecture hall.  The "certain  addenda" were a concession  to the Trustees whoreasonably  remarked  that  without this  catch  nobody would <157>  need toattend my classes. The three hundred copies of  the two thousand typed pageswere  to  be  signed by  the readers  and returned  to me  before the  finalexamination. There were flaws at first in the system (for example, only  153incomplete sets, many unsigned,  were returned in 1948) but on the whole  itworked, or should have worked.     Another decision  I took was  to make myself more available to  facultymembers than  I  had  been before.  The red  needle  of  my  dial scale  nowquiver-stopped  at  a  very  conservative  figure, when,  stark naked,  armshanging like those of a clumsy troglodyte, I stood on the fatal platform andwith the help of my new housemaid, an enchanting black girl with an Egyptianprofile, managed to make out what lay midway in the  blur between my readingglasses  and  my long-distance ones:  a  great  triumph, which I  marked  byacquiring several new "costumes," as my Dr. Olga Repnin says in the novel ofthat  name--"I don't  know (all  `o's' as  in  `don'  and  `anon')  why yourhorseband  wears such not  modern costumes." I  visited quite frequently thePub,  a college tavern, where I tried  to mix  with white-shoed young males,but somehow ended  up by getting involved with  professional barmaids. And Ientered in my pocket diary the addresses of some twenty fellow professors.     Most treasured  among my new friends was a  frail-looking, sad-looking,somewha t   m o n k e y - f a c e d   m a n     w i t h     a     s h o c k   o f   b l a c k     h a i r ,     g r a y - s t r e a k e d     a t  f i f t y - f i v e ,     t h e   e n c h a n t i n g l y   t a l e n t e d     p o e t     A u d a c e   w h o s e   p a t e r n a l   a n c e s t o r  w a s     t h e   e l o q u e n t     a n d   i l l - f a t e d   G i r o n d i s t   o f   t h a t   n a m e   ( " B o u r r e a u ,   f a i s   t o n  d e v o i r   e n v e r s   l a   L i b e r t 8! " )   b u t  who did not know a word  of French and spokeAmerican  with a  flat  Midwestern accent. Another  interesting  glimpse  ofdescent  was provided by Louise Adamson, the young wife of  our  Chairman ofEnglish: her grandmother, Sybil Lanier,  had  won the  Women's National GolfChampionship in 1896 at Philadelphia! <158>     G                                                                                                                                                                                         8r a r d   A d a m s o n ' s   l i t e r a r y   r e p u t a t i o n     w a s   i m m e n s e l y   s u p e r i o r   t o   t h a t   o f  t h e   i m m e n s e l y   m o r e     i m p o r t a n t ,   b i t t e r ,   a n d     m o d e s t   A u d a c e .   G e r r y     w a s   a     b i g  f l a b b y   h u l k   o f   a   m a n   w h o   m u s t   h a v e   b e e n   n e a r i n g     s i x t y   w h e n   a f t e r   a   l i f e     o f  a e s t h e t i c   a s c e t i c i s m     h e     s u r p r ised his special  coterie  by  marrying  thatporcelain-pretty and very fast girl. His famous essays--on Donne, on Villon,on Eliot--his philosophic  poetry, his  recent  Laic Litanies  and so  forthmeant nothing to me,  but  he was  an appealing  old drunk, whose  humor anderudition could  break  the resistance  of  the most unsociable outsider.  Icaught  myself enjoying the frequent parties  at which good old Noteboke andhis sister Phoneme,  the delightful Kings, the  Adamsons, my favorite  poet,and a dozen other people did all they could to entertain and comfort me.     Louise, who had an inquisitive aunt at Honeywell, kept me  informed, attactful intervals,  of Bel's well-being. One  spring  day in  1949 or 1950 Ihappened to  stop at  the Plaza Liquor  Store  in Rosedale  after a businessmeeting with Horace Peppermill and was about to back out of the parking  lotwhen I saw Annette bending over  a baby carriage in front of a grocery storeat the other end  of the shopping area. Something  about her inclined  neck,her melancholy concentration, the  ghost of a smile directed at the child inthe stroller,  sent such a  pang of pity  through my nervous  system  that Icould not  resist accosting her.  She  turned  toward me  and even before  Iuttered some wild words--of regret, of despair, of tenderness--there she wasshaking her head,  forbidding  me  to  come  near.  "Nikogda," she murmured,"never," and  I could not  bear to decipher the expression on her pale drawnface. A woman came out of  the shop and thanked  her for  tending the littlestranger--a pale  and  thin  infant,  looking  almost as ill as  Annette.  Ihurried back to the parking lot, scolding  myself for not  realizing at oncethat Bel must be a girl of seven  or eight by <159> this time.  Her mother'smoist starry  stare kept pursuing me for several nights; I even felt too illto attend an Easter party at one of the friendly Quirn houses.     During this  or some other  period of  despondency, I heard one day thehall bell tinkle, and my Negro maid, little Nefertitty  as I had dubbed her,hasten to open the  front door. Slipping out of bed I pressed my  bare fleshto  the  cool  window ledge  but was not in time to glimpse the  entrant  orentrants, no matter how  far I  leant  out into a  noisy spring downpour.  Afreshness of  flowers, clusters and  clouds of flowers, reminded me  of someother time,  some other casement.  I made  out part of the Adamsons'  glossyblack car beyond the garden gate. Both? She alone? Solus rex? Both, alas--tojudge  by  the voices  reaching me  from the  hallway through my transparenthouse. Old Gerry, who disliked  unnecessary stairs and  had a morbid fear ofcontagion, remained in the living room. Now his  wife's steps and voice werecoming  up.  We had kissed  for the  first  time a few  days before,  in theNotebokes' kitchen--rummaging  for ice, finding fire.  I  had good reason tohope that the intermission before the obligatory scene would be brief.     She entered, set  down two bottles of port for the  invalid, and pulledoff her  wet sweater over her tumbled chestnut-brown, violet-brown curls andnaked clavicles. Artistically, strictly artistically, I daresay she was  thebest-looking of my three major loves. She had upward-directed thin eyebrows,sapphire eyes registering (and that's the right word) constant amazement  atearth's  paradise  (the  only   one  she  would  ever  know,   I'm  afraid),pink-flushed cheekbones,  a rosebud mouth, and a  lovely concave abdomen. Inless time than it took her husband, a quick reader, to skim down two columnsof print,  we had "attired" him. I put on blue slacks  and a  pink shirt andfollowed her downstairs.     Her  husband sat in  a deep armchair,  reading a  London  <160>  weeklybought at the Shopping Center. He had not bothered to take  off his horribleblack raincoat--a voluminous robe of oilskin that conjured up the image of astagecoach driver  in a lashing storm. He now removed however his formidablespectacles. He  cleared his throat with a  characteristic rumble. His purplejowls wobbled as he tackled the ordeal of rational speech:     GERRY Do you ever  see this paper, Vadim (accenting "Vadim" incorrectlyon the first syllable)? Mister  (naming a particularly lively criticule) hasdemolished your Olga (my novel about the professorsha;  it had come out onlynow in the British edition).     VADIM May I give you a drink? We'll toast him and roast him.     GERRY Yet he's right, you know. It is  your worst book. Chute compl                      Et e ,  s a y s   t h e   m a n .   K n o w s   F r e n c h ,   t o o .            L O U I S E   N o   d r i n k s .   W e ' v e     g o t   t o   r u s h   h o m e .   N o w   h e a v e   o u t   o f   t h a t   c h a i r .  T r y   a g a i n .   T a k e   y o u r   g l a s s e s     a n d   p a p e r .   T h e r e .   A u   r e v o i r ,   V a d i m .   I ' l l   b r i n g  y o u   t h o s e   p i l l s   t o m o r r o w   m o r n i n g   a f t e r   I   d r i v e   h i m   t o   s c h o o l .         How different it all was, I mused,  from  the refined adulteries in thecastles  of  my  early youth! Where  was the  romantic  thrill of  a  glanceexchanged  with one's new mistress in the presence of a morose colossus--theJealous Husband? Why did  the recollection  of the recent  embrace not blendany longer as  it used to do with the  certainty  of the next one, forming asudden rose  in  an empty flute of  crystal, a sudden rainbow  on the  whitewallpaper? What did Emma see a  fashionable woman  drop into that man's silkhat? Write legibly. <161>2     The mad scholar in Esmeralda and  Her Parandrus wreathes Botticelli andShakespeare  together  by  having  Primavera end as  Ophelia  with  all  herflowers.  The loquacious lady in Dr. Olga Repnin remarks  that tornadoes andfloods  are  really  sensational  only  in North America. On  May 17,  1953,several  papers  printed a photograph of a family, complete  with  birdcage,phonograph, and other  valuable possessions, riding it  out  on the  roof oftheir shack in the middle of Rosedale Lake. Other papers carried the pictureof a small Ford caught in the upper branches of an intrepid tree with a man,a Mr. Byrd, whom Horace Peppermill said he knew, still in the driver's seat,stunned, bruised, but alive. A prominent personality  in  the Weather Bureauwas  accused  of   criminally   delayed   forecasts.   A  group  of  fifteenschoolchildren who  had been  taken to  see a collection of  stuffed animalsdonated by Mrs. Rosenthal, the benefactor's  widow, to the Rosedale  Museum,were safe in the sudden  darkness of that  sturdy building when the  twisterstruck. But  the prettiest lakeside cottage got swept away,  and the drownedbodies of its two occupants were never retrieved.     Mr. Peppermill, whose  natural faculties were  no match for  his  legalacumen,  warned me  that  if  I  desired to  relinquish  the  child  to  hergrandmother in France, certain  <162> formalities would  have to be compliedwith. I  observed quietly  that Mrs. Blagovo was  a half-witted cripple  andthat my daughter, whom her schoolteacher harbored, should be brought by thatperson  to my  house AT ONCE. He said he  would fetch her himself early nextweek.     After weighing and  reweighing  every paragraph  of  the  house,  everyparenthesis of its furniture, I decided to  lodge her  in the former bedroomof the late Landover's companion  whom he called  his nurse  or his  fiancedepending  on his  mood of the moment.  This  was  a lovely chamber, east ofmine, with lilac butterflies  enlivening  its wallpaper  and  a  large, low,flouncy bed.  I  peopled its white  bookshelf with Keats, Yeats,  Coleridge,Blake, and  four  Russian poets  (in the New Orthography). Although  I  toldmyself with a  sigh that she would,  no doubt,  prefer  "comics" to my  dearbespangled  mimes and  their wands of painted  lath, I felt compelled  in mychoice  by what  is termed the "ornamental instinct"  among  ornithologists.Moreover, knowing well  how essential  a pure strong  light is to reading inbed, I asked Mrs. O'Leary,  my new charwoman and cook (borrowed from  LouiseAdamson  who  had left with  her husband  for a long sojourn in  England) toscrew  a  couple  of  hundred-watt  bulbs  into a  tall  bedside  lamp.  Twodictionaries, a writing pad, a little alarm clock, and a Junior Manicure Set(suggested  by  Mrs.  Noteboke,  who had  a twelve-year-old  daughter)  wereattractively placed  on a spacious and  stable bedtable. All  this was but arough, naturally. The fair copy would come in due time.     Landover's nurse or fiance could rush to his assistance either along ashort passage or through the bathroom between the two bedrooms: Landover hadbeen a large man and  his long  deep tub  was  a soaker's delight.  Another,narrower bathroom followed Bel's bedroom easterly--and  here I really missedmy  dainty  Louise when racking  my  brain for the  correct  epithet betweenwell-scrubbed and perfumed. Mrs.  Noteboke could not help  me: her daughter,<163>  who  used the  messy  parental  facilities,  had  no  time for  sillydeodorants and  loathed "foam."  Wise old  Mrs. O'Leary, on the  other hand,held  before her mind's  eye Mrs. Adamson's creams and crystals in a Flemishartist's  detail  and made me long  for  her  employer's  speedy  return  byconjuring up  that picture, which she then proceeded  to  simplify,  but notvulgarize, while  retaining  such major items as  the huge sponge, the jumbocake of lavender soap, and a delicious toothpaste.     Walking still  farther  sunriseward, we  reach the  corner  guest  room(above the round dining  room at the  east  end  of the first floor); this Itransformed  with the  help of  a  handyman, Mrs. O'Leary's cousin,  into anefficiently furnished studio. It contained, when I finished with it, a couchwith boxy  pillows, an oak desk with a revolving chair, a  steel  cabinet, abookcase,  Klingsor's Illustrated Encyclopedia in  twenty  volumes, crayons,writing tablets, state  maps, and  (to cite the  School  Buyer's  Guide  for1952-1953) "a globe ball that  lifts out of a cradle so that every child canhold the world in his or her lap."     Was that all? No. I found for  the  bedroom a framed  photograph of hermother, Paris, 1934, and for the studio a reproduction in color of Levitan'sClouds  above a  Blue River (the Volga,  not far  from  my Marevo),  paintedaround 1890.     Peppermill was to bring her on May 21,  around four P.M. I had to  fillsomehow  the abyss  of the afternoon. Angelic Ex had already read and markedthe entire batch of exams, but he thought I  might want to see  some of  theworks he had reluctantly failed. He had dropped in  some time on the eve andhad left them  downstairs on  the round table in  the round room next to thehallway at  the west end of the  house. My poor hands ached and  trembled sodreadfully  that  I could hardly  leaf through those poor cahiers. The roundwindow  gave on the driveway. It was <164>  a warm  gray day. Sir!  I need apassing mark  desperately. Ulysses  was  written in  Zurich  and  Greece andtherefore  consists  of  too many foreign words. One of  the  characters  inTolstoy's Death  of Ivan  is the notorious  actress  Sarah  Bernard. Stern'sstyle  is  very  sentimental  and  illiterative.  A  car  door  banged.  Mr.Peppermill  came with a duffel bag in the wake of a tall fair-haired girl inblue  jeans carrying, and  slowing  down,  to change  from  hand to hand, anunwieldy valise.     Annette's moody  mouth and eyes.  Graceful  but plain.  Fortified by  aserenacin tablet, I received my daughter and lawyer with the neutral dignityfor  which effusive  Russians  in Paris  used  to  detest  me  so  heartily.Peppermill accepted a drop of  brandy. Bel had a glass of peach juice and  abrown biscuit. I indicated to  Bel--who was displaying her palms in a politeRussian allusion--the dining-room  toilet,  an  old-fashioned  touch on  thearchitect's part.  Horace Peppermill  handed me a letter  from Bel's teacherMiss  Emily  Ward. Fabulous Intelligence  Quotient  of 180.  Menses  alreadyestablished. Strange, marvelous child. One  does not quite know  whether  tocurb  or encourage such precocious brilliance.  I accompanied Horace halfwayback to his  car,  fighting  off, successfully, the disgraceful urge to tellhim how staggered I was by the bill his office had recently sent me.     "Let me now show you your apart                                                                                                                                                            0m e n t y .   Y o u   s p e a k   R u s s i a n ,   d o n ' t   y o u ? "            " I   c e r t a i n l y   d o ,   b u t   I   c a n ' t   w r i t e   i t .   I   a l s o   k n o w   a   l i t t l e   F r e n c h . "            S h e     a n d   h e r   m o t h e r   ( w h o m   s h e   m e n t i o n e d     a s   c a s u a l l y   a s   i f   A n n e t t e   w e r e  i n   t h e   n e x t   r o o m     c o p y i n g   s o m e t h i n g   f o r     m e     o n     a   s o u n d l e s s   t y p e w riter) hadspent most of last  summer at  Carnavaux with babushka. I would like to havelearned what  room  exactly Bel had  occupied  in the  villa,  but an  oddlyobtrusive,  though irrelevant-looking,  recollection <165> somehow preventedme from asking: shortly before her death Iris had dreamed one night that shehad given birth to a fat  boy  with dusky red cheeks and almond eyes and theblue shadow of mutton chops: "A horrible Omarus K."     Oh  yes, said Bel, she had loved it. Especially  the path down, down tothe sea and the aroma of rosemary (chudnyy zapakh rozmarina). I was torturedand  charmed  by  her  "shadowless"  migr  Russian,  untainted, God  blessAnnette, by the Langley woman's fruity Sovietisms.     Did Bel recognize me? She looked me over with serious gray eyes.     "I recognize your hands and your hair."     "On se tutoie in Russian henceforward. All right. Let's go upstairs."     She  approved of  the  studio: "A  schoolroom in a picture  book."  Sheopened  the medicine chest in her bathroom. "Empty--but I know what I'll putthere."  The bedroom  "enchanted"  her. Ocharovatel'no! (Annette's  favoritepraise word.) She  criticized, though,  the  bedside  bookshelf:  "What,  noByron? No Browning? Ah, Coleridge!  The  little golden sea snakes. Miss Wardgave me an anthology for  Russian Easter:  I can recite your last duchess--Imean `My Last Duchess' "     I caught  my breath with a moan. I kissed her. I wept. I sat,  shaking,on  a fragile chair that creaked in response  to my hunched-up paroxysm. Belstood  looking away, looking  up  at a prismatic reflection on  the ceiling,looking down at her  luggage, which Mrs. O'Leary, a dumpy but doughty woman,had already brought up.     I  apologized  for  my  tears.  Bel  inquired  in  a  socially  perfectlet's-change-the-subject manner if there was  a television set in the house.I  said  we'd get one tomorrow. I would  leave  her  now to her own devices.Dinner in half-an-hour. She had noticed, she said, that a picture she'd like<166>  to see was being  shown in town. After dinner we drove to The  StrandTheater.     Says a scribble in my diary: Does not much care for boiled chicken. TheBlack Widow. With  Gene, Ginger, and George. Have passed  the "illiterative"sentimentalist and all the rest. <167>3     If  Bel  is  alive today, she is thirty-two--exactly  your  age  at themoment of writing (February 15, 1974). The last time I saw her, in 1959, shewas not quite seventeen; and  between eleven and  a half and seventeen and ahalf she has changed very slightly in the medium of memory, where blood doesnot  course  through  immobile  time as fast  as it does in  the  perceptualpresent.  Especially  unaffected  by  linear  growth  is  my  vision  of herpertaining to  1953-1955,  the three  years in  which she  was  totally  anduniquely mine: I see it today as a composite portrait of rapture, in which amountain in Colorado, my translating Tamara into  English, Bel's high schoolaccomplishments, and an Oregon forest  intergrade  in patterns of transposedtime and twisted space that defy chronography and charting.     One  change, one  gradational trend I must note,  however. This was  mygrowing awareness of her  beauty.  Scarcely a month after her  arrival I wasalready  at a loss to understand how she could  have struck  me  as "plain."Another month elapsed and  the  elfin  line  of  her nose  and  upper lip inprofile came as an "expected revelation"--to use a formula I have applied tocertain prosodic miracles in Blake and Blok. Because of the contrast betweenher pale-gray iris and very  black lashes, her eyes seemed rimmed <168> withkohl. Her hollowed cheek and long neck were pure Annette, but her fair hair,which she wore rather short, gave off a richer sheen as if the tawny strandswere mixed with  gold-olive ones  in  thick  straight  stripes  of alternateshades. All this  is easily described  and  this also goes for  the  regularstriation of  bright bloom  along the outside of forearm and leg, which,  infact, smacks  of self-plagiarism, for  I had given it  both  to  Tamara  andEsmeralda, not counting several incidental lassies in my  short stories (seefor example  page 537 of  the Exile  from Mayda collection, Goodminton,  NewYork, 1947). The general type and bone structure  of her pubescent  radiancecannot  be treated,  however,  with  a crack player's brio  and chalk-bitingserve.  I  am  reduced--a sad  confession!--to something  I have  also  usedbefore,  and  even  in this  book--the well-known  method  of  degrading onespecies  of  art  by  appealing  to  another.   I  am  thinking  of  Serov'sFive-petaled Lilac, oil, which depicts  a tawny-haired girl of twelve or  sositting at a sun-flecked table and manipulating  a raceme of lilac in searchof that lucky token. The girl is no other than Ada Bredow, a first cousin ofmine whom  I flirted with disgracefully that  very  summer, the sun of whichocellates the garden table and her bare arms. What hack reviewers of fictioncall "human interest" will now overwhelm my reader, the gentle tourist, whenhe  visits  the Hermitage Museum in Leningrad, where I have seen with my ownrheumy eyes, on a visit to Sovietland  a few years  ago,  that picture whichbelonged  to Ada's grandmother before  being handed over to the People by  adedicated  purloiner. I believe  that this enchanting  little girl  was  themodel of my partner in a recurrent dream of mine with a stretch of parquetrybetween two beds in  a makeshift  demonic  guest  room. Bel's resemblance toher--same cheekbones, same chin, same knobby wrists, same tender flower--canbe only alluded to, not actually  listed.  But enough  of this.  I have beentrying to do something very difficult and I will tear <169> it up if you sayI  have  succeeded too well,  because I  do  not want,  and never wanted, tosucceed, in this  dismal business of Isabel  Lee--though at the  same time Iwas intolerably happy.     When asked--at  last!--had  she loved  her mother (for  I could not getover Bel's apparent indifference  to  Annette's terrible death)  she thoughtfor such  a long  time  that  I decided  she had forgotten  my question, butfinally (like a chessplayer  resigning  after an  abyss  of meditation), sheshook her head. What about Nelly Langley? This she answered at once: Langleywas  mean and cruel and  hated her, and  only last year whipped her; she hadwelts all over (uncovering for display her right thigh, which now, at least,was impeccably white and smooth).     The education  she got in Quirn's best private school for Young  Ladies(you, her coeval, were there for a few weeks, in the same class, but you andshe  somehow missed making  friends with each other) was supplemented by thetwo  summers we spent roaming all over  the Western states.  What  memories,what  lovely  smells,  what  mirages, near-mirages,  substantiated  mirages,accumulated along Highway 138--Sterling, Fort  Morgan (El.  4325),  Greeley,well-named Loveland--as we approached the paradise part of Colorado!     From  Lupine Lodge, Estes Park, where  we spent  a whole  month, a pathmargined with  blue  flowers led  through aspen groves  to what  Bel  drollycalled  The Foot of the Face. There was  also the Thumb  of the Face, at itssouthern corner. I have a large  glossy  photograph taken by William Garrellwho was the  first, I think,  to reach  The  Thumb,  in 1940 or thereabouts,showing  the  East  Face of  Longs Peak  with the checkered lines of  ascentsuperimposed in a loopy  design upon it. On the back of this picture--and asimmortal  in its own little  right as the  picture's subject--a poem by Bel,neatly copied in violet ink,  is <170> dedicated to  Addie Alexander, "Firstwoman on Peak, eighty years ago." It commemorates our own modest hikes:     Longs' Peacock Lake:     the Hut and its Old Marmot;     Boulder field and its Black Butterfly;     And the intelligent trail.     She  had  composed it while  we were sharing a  picnic lunch, somewherebetween those great rocks and the  beginning of The Cable, and after testingthe  result  mentally a number of  times,  in frowning silence, she  finallyscribbled it on a paper napkin which she handed to me with my pencil.     I told  her how wonderful  and  artistic it  was--particularly the lastline.  She asked: what's "artistic"? I said: "Your  poem, you, your way withwords."     In  the course of  that ramble,  or  perhaps on  a latter occasion, butcertainly in  the same region, a  sudden storm swept  upon  the glory of theJuly day. Our  shirts,  shorts, and loafers seemed to  dwindle to nothing inthe icy mist.  A  first hailstone hit a tin can, another  my  bald  spot. Wesought  refuge in a  cavity under a jutting  rock.  Thunderstorms to  me areagony.  Their  evil pressure destroys me;  their lightning forks through  mybrain and breast.  Bel knew this; huddling against me (for my comfort ratherthan  hers!), she kept giving me a  quick little kiss on the temple at everybang of thunder, as  if  to say:  That one's  over, you're still safe. I nowfelt myself longing for  those  crashes  never  to cease; but presently theyturned to halfhearted rumbles,  and the sun found emeralds in a patch of wetturf. She could  not stop shivering,  though,  and I had to thrust my  handsunder her skirt and  rub  her thin body, till it  glowed, so  as to ward off"pneumonia" which she said, laughing jerkily, was a "new," was a "moon," was<171> a "new moon" and a "moan," a "new moan," thank you.     There  is  a hollow of dimness again in the sequence, but it  must havebeen soon after that, in  the same  motor court, or in the next, on the  wayhome, that she slipped into  my room at dawn,  and sat  down on my bed--moveyour legs--in her pyjama top to read me another poem:     In the dark basement, I stroked     the silky head of a wolf.     When the light returned     and all cried: "Ah!,"     it turned out to be only     M                                                                                                                                                            8d o r ,   a   d e a d   d o g .             I   a g a i n   p r a i s e d   h e r   t a l e n t ,   a n d   k i s s e d   h e r     m o r e   w a r m l y ,   p e r h a p s ,     t h a n  t h e   p o e m   d e s e r v e d ;   f o r ,   a c t u a l l y ,   I   f o u n d   i t   r a t h e r   o b s c u r e ,   b u t   d i d   n o t   s a y  s o ,   a n d   p r e s e n t l y   s h e   y a w n e d   a n d   f e l l   a s l e e p   o n   m y   b e d ,   a   p r a c t i c e   I   u s u a l l y  d i d     n ot  tolerate. Today, however, on rereading  those strange lines, I seethrough their starry crystal  the tremendous commentary I could  write aboutthem, with galaxies of reference marks and footnotes like the reflections ofbrightly lit bridges spanning black water. But my  daughter's soul  is hers,and my soul is mine, and may Hamlet Godman rot in peace. <172>4     As late as the start of the 1954-1955 school year, with Bel nearing herthirteenth birthday,  I  was still deliriously happy,  still  seeing nothingwrong or dangerous, or absurd or downright cretinous,  in  the  relationshipbetween my daughter and me. Save  for a few  insignificant lapses--a few hotdrops  of overflowing tenderness, a  gasp masked by a cough and that sort ofstuff--my relations with  her remained essentially  innocent.  But  whateverqualities I might have possessed  as a Professor of Literature, nothing  butincompetence and  a reckless laxity of  discipline can  I  see  today in therearview reflection of that sweet wild past.     Others forestalled me in perspicacity. My first  critic  happened to beMrs.  Noteboke, a stout  dark lady in suffragettish  tweeds, who  instead ofkeeping her  Marion,  a depraved and  vulgar  nymphet,  from  snooping  on aschoolmate's home life, lectured me on  the upbringing of  Bel  and stronglyadvised my hiring an experienced, preferably German, governess to look afterher day  and night.  My second critic--a much more tactful and understandingone--was my secretary, Myrna Soloway, who complained that she could not keeptrack of the literary magazines and clippings  in my mail--because  of theirbeing intercepted by an unscrupulous  and avid little  reader--and who <173>gently added that Quirn High School,  the last refuge of common  sense in myincredible plight, was astounded  by Bel's lack of manners almost as much asby her intelligence and  familiarity with  "Proust  and Pr                                                                                                                8v o s t . "   I   s p o k e   t o  M i s s     L o w e ,     t h e     r a t h e r     p r e t t y     p e t i t e     h e a d m i s t r e s s ,     a n d     s h e     m e n t i o n e d  " b o a r d i n g   f a c i l i t i e s , "   w h i c h     s o u n d e d   l i k e   s o m e   k i n d   o f   w o o d e n   j a i l ,   a n d   t h e  e v e n   m o r e   d i s m a l   ( " w i t h   a l l   t h o s e   r i p p l i n g   b i r d c a l l s   a n d   w i c k e r i n g   t r i l l s   i n  t h e   w o ods,  Miss Lowe--in  the woods"!) "summer instruction" to replace  the"eccentricities  of  an artist's (`A great artist's, Professor') household."She  pointed  out to  the giggling and  apprehensive  artist  that  a  youngdaughter should be treated as a potential  component of our  society and notas a fancy  pet.  Throughout that talk I could not  shake off the feeling ofits  all  being a nightmare that  I  had had  or  would  have in  some otherexistence, some other bound sequence of numbered dreams.           A n     a t m o s p h e r e   o f   v a g u e   d i s t r e s s     w a s     g a t h e r i n g   ( t o     s p e a k     i n     v e r b a l  c l i c h 8s   a b o u t   a     c l i c h 8    s i t u a t i o n )     a r o u n d   m y   m e t a p h o r i c a l   h e a d ,   w h e n   t h e r e  o c c u r r e d     t o   m e     a     s i m p l e   a n d     b r i l l i a n t     s o l u t i o n   o f     a l l   m y     p r o b l e m s   a n d  t r o u b l e s .            T h e     t a l l  looking  glass  before  which many of  Landover's houris  hadonduled in  their brief brown glory now served me  to behold the image  of alion-hued fifty-five-year-old would-be athlete performing waist-slimming andchest-expanding exercises by means of an "Elmago"  ("Combines the mechanicalknow-how of the West with the magic of Mithra"). It was a good image. An oldtelegram (found unopened in an issue of Artisan, a literary  review, filchedby Bel from the  hallway table),  was addressed  to me  by a Sunday paper inLondon, asking  me to comment on  the rumors--which I  had already heard--tothe  effect that I was  the main candidate in the abstract scramble for whatour American kid brothers called "the most prestigious  prize in the world."This, too,  might  impress the rather success-minded  person I had in  view.<174> Finally, I knew that  in  the  vacational months of 1955 a  series  ofstrokes had  killed  off in London  poor old Gerry Adamson, a great guy, andthat Louise was free.  Too free in fact. An  urgent  letter I now wrote her,summoning her back to  Quirn at once, for a serious  Discussion  of a matterconcerning both her and me, reached her only after describing a comic circlevia four fashionable  spots on the Continent. I never saw the wire  she saidshe sent me from New York on October 1.     On October 2, an abnormally warm day, the  first of a week-long series,Mrs.  King telephoned in the afternoon  to  invite me  with rather enigmaticlittle  laughs  to  an "impromptu soir         8e ,   i n     a   f e w   h o u r s ,     s a y   a t   n i n e   P . M .  a f t e r   y o u     h a v e   t u c k e d   i n   y o u r     a d o r a b l e   d a u g h t e r .   I   a g r e e d   t o   c o m e     b e c a u s e  M r s .   K i n g   w a s   a n   e s p e c i a l l y   n i c e   s o u l ,   t h e   k i n d e s t   o n   t h e   c a m p u s .            I   h a d   a   b l a c k     h e a d a c h e   a n d   d e c i d e d   t h a t   a     t w o - m i l e     w a l k     i n   t h e   c o olclear night would do me good. My dealings with space and spatial transitionsare  so  diabolically complicated  that  I do  not  recall whether I  reallywalked, or  drove, or limited  myself to pacing up and down the open galleryrunning along the front side of our second floor, or what.     The  first person  to whom  my  hostess  introduced  me--with a subduedfanfare  of social clarion--was  the "English" cousin  with  whom Louise hadbeen staying in Devonshire, Lady Morgain, "daughter of our former Ambassadorand widow  of  the  Oxford  medievalist"--shadowy figures  on a briefly  litscreen.  She  was a  rather  deaf and decidedly  dotty witch in  her  middlefifties,  comically  coiffured and dowdily  dressed, and  she and  her bellyadvanced  upon  me with such energetic eagerness that I scarcely had time tosidestep  the well-meant attack before getting wedged "between the books andthe bottles" as poor Gerry used to say in reference to academic cocktails. Ipassed  into a different, far more stylish world as I bent to kiss  Louise's<175> expertly swanned cool little hand. My dear old Audace welcomed me withthe  kind of  Latin  accolade that he  had especially developed to  mark thehighest degree of spiritual kinship and mutual esteem. John King, whom I hadseen on the eve in a college corridor, greeted me with raised arms as if thefifty  hours elapsed since our  last  chat had been magically  blown-up intohalf a century. We were only six  people in a spacious parlor,  not countingtwo  painted girl-children in Tyrolean dress, whose  presence, identity, andvery  existence have remained  to  this  day  a  familiar mystery--familiar,because such zigzag cracks  in the  plaster  are  typical of the prisons  orpalaces into which recrudescent derangement merrily leads me whenever I haveprepared to make, as  I was to  do now, a difficult, climactic  announcementthat demanded absolute clarity of concentration. So, as I just said, we wereonly six animal people  in  that room (and two little phantoms), but throughthe translucid unpleasant walls I could make out--without looking!--rows andtiers  of dim spectators, with the  sense  of  a  sign  in my brain  meaning"standing room only" in the language of madness.     We   were  now  sitting  at   a  round  clockfaced  table  (practicallyundistinguishable from the  one  in the  Opal Room of my  house, west of thealbino Stein), Louise at twelve o'clock, Professor King at two, Mrs. Morgainat four, Mrs.  King  in green silk  at eight, Audace  at ten, and I  at six,presumably,  or  a  minute past, because Louise was not  quite  opposite, ormaybe  she  had  pushed  her chair  a  sixty-second  space closer to  Audacealthough she  had sworn to me on the  Social  Register as well as on a Who'sWho  that  he  had  never made that pass  at her  somehow  suggested  by hismagnificent little poem in the Artisan.     Speaking of, ah, yesternights,     I had you, dear, within earshot <176>     of that party downstairs,     on the broad bed of my host     piled with the coats of your guests,     old macks, mock minks,     one striped scarf (mine),     a former flame's furs     (more rabbit than flipperling),     yea, a mountain of winters,     like that upon which flunkeys sprawl     in the vestibule of the Opera,     Canto One of Onegin,     where under the chandeliers     of a full house, you, dear,     should have been the dancer     flying, like fluff, in a decor     of poplars and fountains.     I  started to speak  in the  high, clear, insolent  voice (taught me byIvor on  the beach of Cannice) by which I instilled the fear of Phoebus wheninaugurating a recalcitrant seminar in my first years of teaching  at Quirn:"What I plan to discuss is the curious case of a close friend of mine whom Ishall call--"     Mrs.  Morgain  set  down  her glass  of  whisky  and  leaned toward  meconfidentially: "You know I met little Iris  Black in London, around 1919, Iguess. Her father was a business friend of my father,  the Ambassador. I wasa  starry-eyed  American  gal.  She   was  a  fantastic  beauty   and   mostsophisticated. I remember how  thrilled  I was later to  learn that she  hadgone and married a Russian Prince!"     "Fay,"  cried Louise from twelve to four: "Fay! His Highness  is makinghis throne speech."     Everyone laughed, and  the two  bare-thighed Tyrolean children  chasingeach  other  around the table bounced  across my knees and were  gone again.<177>     "I shall  call this close friend of mine,  whose case we are  about  toexamine, Mr. Twidower, a name with certain connotations, as those of you whoremember the title story in my Exile from Mayda will note."     (Three people, the Kings and Audace, raised three hands, looking at oneanother in shared smugness.)     "This person, who is in the mighty middle of life, thinks of marrying athird  time. He is deeply in  love with a  young woman. Before proposing  toher, however, honesty demands that he confess he is suffering from a certainailment. I  wish they would stop  jolting my chair  every time  they run by.`Ailment' is  perhaps  too strong  a  term. Let's put it this way: there arecertain flaws,  he says, in the mechanism  of his mind.  The one he told  meabout is harmless in itself but very distressing and  unusual, and may be  asymptom of  some imminent,  more serious  disorder. So here goes. When  thisperson is lying  in bed and imagining a familiar stretch of street, say, theright-hand sidewalk from the Library to, say--"     "The Liquor Store," put in King, a relentless wag.     "All  right,  Recht's  Liquor  Store.  It is about  three hundred yardsaway--"     I was again interrupted, this  time  by  Louise (whom,  in fact, I  wassolely  addressing).  She  turned to Audace  and informed him that she couldnever visualize  any distance in yards  unless she  could  divide it  by thelength of a bed or a balcony.     "Romantic," said Mrs. King. "Go on, Vadim."     "Three hundred paces away along  the same side  as the College Library.Now comes my friend's problem. He can walk in his mind there and back but hecan't perform in his mind the actual about-face that transforms `there' into`back.' "     "Must call Rome," muttered Louise to Mrs. King, and was about to  leaveher  seat, but I  implored her  to hear me <178> out. She  resigned herself,warning me however that she could not understand a word of my peroration.     "Repeat  that  bit about twisting  around  in your  mind,"  said  King."Nobody understood."     "I did," said  Audace:  "We  suppose  the  Liquor Store  happens  to beclosed, and Mr. Twidower, who is a friend of  mine too, turns on his heel togo  back  to the  Library. In  the reality of  life he  perfoms  this actionwithout a hitch or hiatus, as simply and unconsciously as we all do, even ifthe artist's critical eye does see--A toi, Vadim."     "Does see," I said, accepting the relay-race baton, "that, depending onthe speed  of one's revolution,  palings and awnings pass counterwise aroundyou either with  the heavy lurch of a merry-go-round or (saluting Audace) ina single brisk flip like that of the end of  a striped scarf (Audace smiled,acknowledging the Audacianism) that one flings over one's shoulder. But whenone lies immobile in bed  and rehearses or rather replays in one's  mind theprocess of turning, in the  manner described, it is  not so much the pivotalswing which is hard to perceive mentally--it is its result, the reversion ofvista, the transformation  of direction, that's what  one  vainly strives toimagine. Instead  of  the liquor-store direction smoothly turning  into  theopposite one, as it does in the simplicity of  waking life, poor Twidower isbaffled--"     I had seen it  coming but had hoped that I would be allowed to completemy sentence.  Not at  all. With the infinitely slow and silent movement of agray  tomcat, which  he resembled with his bristly whiskers and arched back,King left his seat. He started  to tiptoe, with a glass in each hand, towardthe golden glow of a densely populated sideboard. With a  dramatic  slap  ofboth hands against the edge of the table I caused Mrs. Morgain to  jump (shehad  either dozed  off  or  aged tremendously in the last  few minutes)  andstopped old King in his  tracks; he silently <179>  turned like an automaton(illustrating my story) and as silently  stole  back to  his seat  with  theempty Arabesque glasses.     "The mind, my friend's mind, is baffled, as  I was saying, by somethingdreadfully strainful  and irksome  in the machinery  of the  change from oneposition to another,  from east  to west  or west to east,  from one  damnednymphet to another--I mean I'm  losing the thread  of my tale, the zipper ofthought has stuck, this is absurd--"     Absurd  and  very  embarrassing.  The two  cold-thighed,  cheesy-neckedgirleens  were now engaged in a quarrelsome game as  to who should sit on myleft knee, that side of my lap where the honey was, trying to  straddle LeftKnee, warbling in Tyrolese and pushing each other off, and  cousin Fay  keptbending toward  me  and  saying with  a macabre accent:  "Elles vous  aimenttant!" Finally I pinched and twisted the nearest buttock, and with  a squealthey resumed their  running around, like  that eternal  little pleasure-parktrain, brushing the brambles.     I still  could  not  disentangle my thoughts,  but Audace  came  to  myrescue.     "To  conclude," he said  (and  an audible  ouf!  was emitted  by  cruelLouise), "our patient's trouble concerns not a certain physical  act but theimagining  of  its performance.  All  he  can  do  in his mind is  omit  theswiveling part  altogether and shift from one  visual plane  to another withthe neutral flash of a slide  change in a magic lantern, whereupon  he findshimself facing in a direction which has lost, or rather never contained, theidea of `oppositeness.' Does anybody wish to comment?"     After  the usual  pause  that follows  such offers, John King said: "Myadvice to your Mr. Twitter  is to dismiss that nonsense  once for  all. It'scharming nonsense, it's colorful  nonsense, but it's also harmful  nonsense.Yes, Jane?" <180>     "My father," said  Mrs. King, "a  professor  of  botany,  had a  ratherendearing   quirk:   he  could   memorize  historical  dates  and  telephonenumbers--for example our number 9743--only insofar as they contained primes.In our  number  he  remembered two figures, the  second  and last, a uselesscombination; the other two were only black gaps, missing teeth."     "Oh, that's good," cried Audace, genuinely delighted. I remarked it wasnot at  all  the same  thing. My  friend's affliction  resulted  in  nausea,dizziness, kegelkugel headache.     "Well  yes, I understand,  but  my  father's  quirk  also had  its sideeffects. It was not so much his inability to memorize, say, his house numberin  Boston, which was 68 and  which he  saw every day,  but the fact that hecould  do nothing about it; that nobody, but nobody could explain why all hecould make out  at the  far end  of his  brain was  not 68 but a  bottomlesshole."     Our host  resumed his vanishing act with more deliberation than before.Audace  lidded his empty glass with his palm. Though  swine-drunk,  I longedfor mine to be refilled,  but was bypassed.  The walls of the round room hadgrown more or less opaque  again, God bless them,  and  the Dolomite Dollieswere no longer around.     "In  the days when I longed to  be a ballerina," said Louise,  "and wasBlanc's little favorite,  I  always rehearsed exercises in my  mind lying inbed, and had no  difficulty whatever in imagining swirls and whirls. It is amatter of practice, Vadim. Why don't you just roll over in bed when you wantto see yourself walking back  to that Library? We must be  going  now,  Fay,it's past midnight."     Audace glanced  at his wristwatch, uttered  the exclamation which  Timemust be  sick  of  hearing,  and  thanked  me for a wonderful evening.  LadyMorgain's  mouth mimicked the pink aperture  of an elephant's  trunk  as  itmutely formed  the word "loo" to which  Mrs. King, fussily <181> swishing ingreen, immediately  took  her. I remained  alone  at  the  round table, thenstruggled to my feet, drained the rest of Louise's daiquiri,  and joined herin the hallway.     She had never  melted and shivered so nicely  in  my embrace as she didnow.     "How many quadruped critics," she  asked  after a  tender  pause in thedark  garden, "would  accuse  you  of  leg  pulling  if  you  published  thedescription of those funny feelings. Three, ten, a herd?"     "Those are not  really  `feelings' and they  are  not really `funny.' Ijust wished you to be aware that if I go mad it will be in consequence of mygames with  the idea of space. `Rolling  over' would be cheating and besideswould not help."     "I'll take you to an absolutely divine analyst."     "That's all you can suggest?"     "Why, yes."     "Think, Louise."     "Oh. I'm also going to marry you. Yes, of course, you idiot."     She was gone  before I could reclasp her slender form. The  star-dustedsky,  usually  a scary affair, now vaguely  amused me: it belonged, with theautumn fadeur  of barely visible flowers, to the same  issue  of Woman's OwnWorld as Louise. I made water into a sizzle of asters and looked up at Bel'swindow, square c2. Lit as brightly as e1, the Opal  Room. I  went back thereand noted with relief that kind hands had cleared  and tidied the table, theround  table  with  the opalescent rim,  at  which I  had delivered  a  mostsuccessful  introductory lecture.  I heard  Bel's voice calling  me from theupper landing, and taking a  palmful of salted almonds  ascended the stairs.<182>5     Rather  early  next morning,  a  Sunday, as  I  stood, shawled in terrycloth, and watched four eggs rolling and bumping in their inferno,  somebodyentered the living room through a side door that I never bothered to lock.     Louise! Louise dressed  up in hummingbird mauve for church. Louise in asloping beam of mellow October sun. Louise leaning against  the grand piano,as if about to sing and looking around with a lyrical smile.     I was the first to break our embrace.     VADIM No, darling, no. My daughter may come down any minute. Sit down.     LOUISE (examining an armchair and then settling  in it) Pity. You know,I've  been  here  many  times before! In  fact I was laid  on  that grand ateighteen.   Aldy  Landover   was  ugly,  unwashed,  brutal--and   absolutelyirresistible.     VADIM Listen, Louise.  I  have always found your  free, frivolous stylevery fetching. But  you will be moving into this house very soon now, and wewant a little more dignity, don't we? <183>     LOUISE  We'll have  to change that blue carpet. It makes the Stein looklike an iceberg.  And there should be a riot of  flowers.  So many big vasesand not one  Strelitzia! There  was a whole shrub of lilac down  there in mytime.     VADIM It's October, you know. Look, I hate  to bring this up, but isn'tyour cousin waiting in the car? It would be very irregular.     LOUISE Irregular, my foot. She won't be up before lunch. Ah, Scene Two.     (Bel wearing only slippers and a cheap necklace of  iridescent glass--aRiviera souvenir--comes down at the other end  of the living room beyond thepiano. She has already turned kitchenward showing the beau-page back  of herhead and delicate shoulder blades when she becomes aware of our presence andretraces her steps.)     BEL  (addressing me and  casually  squinting at my amazed  visitor)  Yabezumno golodnaya (I'm madly hungry).     VADIM Louise dear, this is my daughter Bel. She's walking in her sleep,really, hence the, uh, non-attire.     LOUISE Hullo, Annabel. The non-attire is very becoming.     BEL (correcting Louise) Isa.     VADIM Isabel, this is  Louise Adamson, an old friend of mine, back fromRome. I hope we'll be seeing a lot of her. <184>     BEL How do you do (question-markless).     VADIM Well,  run along, Bel, and put on something. Breakfast is  ready.(To Louise) Would you like to have breakfast too?  Hard-boiled eggs? A  Cokewith a straw? (Pale violin climbing stairs)     LOUISE Non, merci. I'm flabbergasted.     VADIM  Yes, things have been  getting a  little out of hand, but you'llsee, she's a special  child, there's no other child like her. All we need isyour presence, your touch. She has inherited  the habit of  circulating in astate of nature from me. An Edenic gene. Curious.     LOUISE  Is  this a  two-people nudist  colony or  has Mrs. O'Leary alsojoined?     VADIM (laughing) No, no, she's not here on Sundays. Everything is fine,I assure you. Bel is a docile angel. She--     LOUISE  (rising to leave) There  she comes to be  fed (Bel descends thestairs in a skimpy  pink robe). Drop in around tea time. Fay is being  takenby Jane King to a lacrosse game in Rosedale. (Exits)     BEL Who's she? Former student of yours? Drama? Elocution?     VADIM (moving  fast) Bozhe moy! (good Lord!). The eggs! They must be ashard as  jade.  Come along. I'll acquaint  you with the  situation,  as yourschoolmistress says. <185>6     The  grand  was  the  first to  go--it was carried  out  by  a  gang ofstaggering  iceberg movers  and donated by me to Bel's  school, which  I hadreasons  to  pamper:  I  am not  an  easily  frightened  man  but when  I amfrightened I am very much frightened, and  at a second interview  that I hadhad  with  the  schoolmistress,  my  impersonation  of an indignant  CharlesDodgson  was  only saved  from failure by the sensational news  of my  beingabout to  marry an irreproachable socialite,  the  widow  of our most  piousphilosopher. Louise, per contra,  regarded the throwing out of  a symbol  ofluxury as  a  personal affront and  a crime: a concert  piano of  that  kindcosts, she said, as least as much as her old Hecate convertible, and she wasnot  quite  as  wealthy as,  no  doubt,  I  thought  she  was,  a  statementrepresenting that knot in Logic: the  double-hitch lie which does  not  makeone  truth.  I appeased her by gradually  overcrowding the Music Room  (if atime series be  transformed  into sudden space)  with the modish gadgets sheloved,   singing  furniture,  miniature  TV   sets,  stereorphics,  portableorchestras,  better and better  video  sets,  remote-control instruments forturning those things on or off, and an automatic telephone dialer. For Bel'sbirthday  she  gave  her  a  Rain  Sound machine  to promote sleep;  and  tocelebrate my <186>  birthday she murdered a neurotic's night by getting me athousand-dollar bedside Pantomime clock  with  twelve yellow  radii  on  itsblack face instead of  figures, which  made  it look blind to me or feigningblindness  like  some  repulsive  beggar  in  a  hideous  tropical town;  incompensation that  terrible object possessed  a secret beam  that  projectedArabic numerals (2:00,  2:05, 2:10, 2:15, and so forth) on the ceiling of mynew  sleeping quarters, thus demolishing the  sacred, complete,  agonizinglyachieved occlusion of its oval window. I said I'd buy a gun and  shoot it inthe mug, if she did not send it back  to  the fiend who sold  it to her. Shereplaced it by "something especially  made for people who like originality,"namely  a   silver-plated  umbrella  stand  in   the   shape   of   a  giantjackboot--there was  "something  about rain  strangely attractive to her" asher "analyst" wrote me in one of the silliest letters that man ever wrote toman. She  was also fond of small expensive animals,  but  here I stood firm,and she never got the long-coated Chihuahua she coldly craved.     I did not expect much of  Louise the Intellectual. The only time  I sawher shed big tears, with interesting little howls of real grief, was when onthe first Sunday  of our marriage all the  newspapers carried photographs ofthe two Albanian authors (a  bald-domed old  epicist and a  longhaired womancompiler of childrens'  books)  who shared out between  them the PrestigiousPrize that she had told everybody I was sure to win  that year. On the otherhand  she  had  only  flipped  through  my novels  (she  was  to  read  moreattentively, though, A Kingdom by the Sea, which I began  slowly to pull outof myself in 1957 like a long brain worm,  hoping it would not break), whileconsuming  all  the  "serious"  bestsellers  discussed by  sister  consumersbelonging to  the Literary Group in which she liked to  assert  herself as awriter's wife.     I also discovered  that she  considered herself a connoisseur of ModernArt. She  blazed with anger  at  me  when <187> I said  I  doubted  that theappreciation of a green stripe across a blue background had  any  connectionwith its definition in a glossy catalogue as "producing a virtually Orientalatmosphere of spaceless  time  and timeless space." She accused me of tryingto wreck her entire  view of the world  by maintaining--in a facetious vein,she hoped--that only a  Philistine misled by  the solemn imbeciles  paid  towrite about exhibitions could tolerate rags, rinds, and fouled paper rescuedfrom a  garbage can and discussed  in terms  "of warm splashes of color" and"good-natured irony."  But perhaps most touching and terrible of all was herhonestly  believing that painters  painted  "what they felt";  that a ratherrough  and rumpled landscape  dashed off in the Provence might be gratefullyand proudly interpreted by art students if a psychiatrist explained  to themthat the  advancing thundercloud  represented  the artist's  clash  with hisfather,  and  the  rolling  grainfield the early  death of his mother  in  ashipwreck.     I could not prevent her from purchasing  specimens of the pictorial arti n   v o g u e   b u t   I   j u d i c i o u s l y   s t e e r e d   s o m e   o f   t h e   m o r e   r e p u l s i v e   o b j e c t s     ( s u c h  a s   a   c o l l e c t i o n   o f   d a u b s   p r o d u c e d   b y   " n a >v e "   c o n v i c t s )   i n t o   t h e   r o u n d   d i n i n g  r o o m   w h e r e   t h e y     s w a m   b l u r r i l y   i n     t h e     c a n d l e l i g h t   w h e n     w e   h a d     g u e s t s   f o r  s u p p e r .   O u r   r o u t i n e   m e a l s  generally took place in the snackbar niche betweenthe kitchen and the housemaid's quarters.  Into that niche Louise introducedher new Cappuccino Espresso Maker, while at the  opposite end of the  house,in the Opal Room, a heavily built, hedonically  appareled bed with a  paddedheadboard was installed for me. The adjacent bathroom had a less comfortabletub than my former  one, and  certain inconveniences attended my excursions,two or  three nights  per week, to  the connubial chamber--via drawing room,creaky  stairs,   upper  landing,  second-floor  corridor,   and   past  theinscrutable chink-gleam of Bel's door; but I  treasured my privacy more thanI resented its drawbacks. I had the "Turkish toupet," as Louise <188> calledit,  to  forbid  her  to  communicate with me  by  thumping  on  her  floor.Eventually I had an interior telephone put in my  room, to  be  used only incertain emergencies: I was thinking of such nervous states as the feeling ofimminent collapse  that I  experienced  sometimes in my nocturnal bouts witheschatological  obsessions;  and  there  was  always  the  half-full box  ofsleeping pills that only she could have filched.     The decision to let Bel stay  in her apartment, with Louise as her onlyneighbor, instead of refurnishing a spiral  of space by  allotting those twoeast-end rooms to Louise--"perhaps I too need a studio?"--while transferringBel with bed and books to the Opal Room downstairs  and leaving me  upstairsin my  former bedchamber, was  taken  by  me  firmly despite Louise's ratherbitchy counter-suggestions, such as removing the tools of my trade  from thelibrary in the basement  and banishing  Bel with  all her belongings to thatwarm, dry, nice  and quiet lair. Though  I knew I  would never give  in, thevery process of shuffling rooms and accessories in my mind made me literallyill.  On top of that, I felt, perhaps wrongly, that Louise was  enjoying thehideous banality of a stepmother-versus-step-daughter situation.  I did  notexactly  regret  marrying  her,   I  recognized  her  charm  and  functionalqualities, but  my adoration  for  Bel  was  the  sole  splendor,  the  solebreathtaking mountain in the drab plain of my emotional life. Being  in manyways an extraordinarily stupid  person, I had simply not  reckoned  with thetangles and tensions of what was  meant to look like  a model household. Themoment I woke up--or at least the moment I saw  that getting up was the onlyway  to  fool early-morning insomnia--I started wondering  what new  projectLouise would invent that day  with which to  harass my girl.  When two yearslater this gray  old  dolt  and his volatile wife, after treating Bel  to  atedious Swiss  tour,  left  her  in  Larive,  between  Hex  and Trex,  at  a"finishing" school (finishing  childhood,  <189> finishing the  innocence ofyoung imagination), it was our 1955-1957 period of life                                                                                                                                                N  t r o i s   i n   t h e   Q u i r n  h o u s e ,   a n d   n o t   m y   e a r l i e r   m i s t a k e s ,   t h a t   I   r e c a l l e d   w i t h   c u r s e s   a n d   s o b s .            S h e   a n d   h e r   s t e p m o t h e r   s t o p p e d   s p e a k i n g   t o   e a c h   o t h e r     a l t o g e t h e r ;   t h e y  c o m m u n i c a t e d ,       i f     n e e d     b e ,     b y     s i g n s :     L o u i s e ,     f o r     i n s t a n c e ,     p o i n t i n g  d r a m a t i cally at  the  ruthless clock and Bel tapping in the negative on  thecrystal  of her loyal little  wristwatch.  She  lost  all  affection for me,twisting away  gently when  I  attempted a perfunctory  caress.  She adoptedagain the wan absent expression that  had dimmed her features at her arrivalfrom  Rosedale. Camus replaced Keats. Her marks deteriorated. She no  longerwrote poetry. One  day as Louise and I were  packing for our  next  trip  toEurope  (London, Paris, Pisa, Stresa, and--in small print--Larive) I startedremoving  some old  maps,  Colorado, Oregon, from the silk  "cheek" inside avalise,  and  the moment  my secret  prompter uttered that  "shcheka" I cameacross  a  poem of  hers written  long before  Louise's intrusion  into  hertrustful young life. I thought it might do Louise good to read it and handedher the exercise-book page (all ragged along its torn root but  still  mine)on which the following lines were penciled:     At sixty, if I'll look back,     jungles and hills will hide     the notch, the source, the sand     and a bird's footprints across it.     I'll see nothing at all     with my old eyes,     yet I'll know it was there, the source.     How come, then, that when I look back     at twelve--one fifth of the stretch!--with     visibility presumably better     and no junk in between, <190>     I can't even imagine     that patch of wet sand     and the walking bird     and the gleam of my source?     "Almost Poundian in purity," remarked Louise--which an n o y e d   m e ,   b e c a u s e  I   t h o u g h t   P o u n d   a   f a k e .   < 1 9 1 >   7              C h 1t e a u   V i g n e d o r ,   B e l ' s     c h a r m i n g   b o a r d i n g   s c h o o l   i n     S w i t z e r l a n d ,   o n   a  c h a r m i n g   h i l l   t h r e e   h u n d r e d   m e t e r s   a b o v e     c h a r m i n g   L a r i v e     o n   t h e   R h Bn e ,   h a d  b e e n   r e c o m m e n d e d   t o   L o u i s e   i n   t h e     a u t u m n   o f   1 9 5 7 by a Swiss lady in Quirn'sFrench  Department.  There were  two  other "finishing" schools  of the samegeneral type that might have done just as well, but Louise set her sights onVignedor because of a chance remark made not even by her Swiss friend but bya chance girl in a chance travel agency  who summed up the qualities  of theschool in one phrase: "Many Tunisian princesses."     It  offered  five  main  subjects  (French,  Psychology,  Savoir-vivre,Couture, Cuisine), various sports (under  the dir e c t i o n   o f   C h r i s t i n e   D u p r a z ,  t h e     o n c e   f a m o u s   s k i e r ) ,   a n d   a   d o z e n   a d d i t i o n a l     c l a s s e s     o n   r e q u e s t     ( w h i c h  w o u l d   k e e p   t h e   p l a i n e s t   g i r l     t h e r e   t i l l   s h e   m a r r i e d ) ,   i n c l u d i n g     B a l l e t   a n d  B r i d g e .     A n o t h e r   s u p p l 8m e n t - - e s p e c i a l l y     s u i t a b l e   f o r     o r p h a n s     o r     u n n e e dedchildren--was  a summer trimester,  filling  up  the year's  last  remainingsegment with excursions and nature studies, to be spent by a few lucky girlsat the  home  of the  headmistress,  Madame de  Turm, an Alpine chalet  sometwelve hundred meters higher: "Its solitary light, twinkling in a black foldof the mountains, can be <192> seen," said the prospectus in four languages,"from  the Ch                                                                                                              1t e a u     o n   c l e a r   n i g h t s . "   T h e r e   w a s   a l s o   s o m e   k i n d   o f     c a m p     f o r  d i f f e r e n t l y   h a n d i c a p p e d   l o c a l   c h i l d r e n   i n     d i f f e r e n t   y e a r s   c o n d u c t e d     b y   o u r  m e d i c a l l y   i n c l i n e d   s p o r t s   d i r e c t r e s s .            1 9 5 7 ,   1 9 5 8 ,   1 9 5 9 .   S o m e t i m e s ,   s e l d o m ,     h i d i n g     f r o m   L o u i s e ,   w h o   o b j e c t e d  to Bel's twenty well-spaced monosyllables' costing us fifty dollars, I wouldcall her  from Quirn, but after a few such calls I received a curt note fromMme. de Turm, asking  me  not  to  upset my daughter  by telephoning, and soretreated  into  my dark  shell. Dark  shell, dark years of  my heart!  Theycoincided oddly with  the composition of my most vigorous, most festive, andcommercially most successful novel, A Kingdom by the Sea.  Its  demands, thefun and  the  fancy of it, its intricate imagery,  made up in  a way for theabsence of my beloved Bel.  It was also bound to reduce, though I was hardlyconscious   of  that,   my  correspondence  with  her  (well-meant,  chatty,dreadfully  artificial letters  which she  seldom troubled to answer).  Evenmore  startling,  of  course,  more  incomprehensible  to  me,  in  groaningretrospect, is the effect my self-entertainment had on the number and lengthof our  visits between  1957  and 1960 (when she  eloped  with a progressiveblond-bearded young American).  You were  appalled  to learn  the other day,when we discussed the present notes, that I had seen "beloved Bel" only fourtimes in three summers and that only two of our  visits lasted  as long as acouple of weeks. I must add, however, that  she resolutely declined to spendher vacations at home. I  ought never, of course, have dumped her in Europe.I should  have elected to sweat  it out  in my  hellish household, between achildish woman and a somber child.     The  work on my novel also impinged on my marital mores, making of me aless passionate and more indulgent husband:  I let Louise go on suspiciouslyfrequent trips  to out-of-town unlisted eye specialists and neglected her inthe meantime  for  Rose Brown,  our cute  housemaid  who  took  <193>  threesoapshowers daily and thought frilly black panties "did something to guys."     But  the  greatest havoc wrought  by my  work  was  its  effect  on  mylectures. To it I sacrificed,  like  Gain, the flowers  of  my summers, and,like  Abel, the sheep  of  the  campus.  Because  of it, the process  of  myacademic discarnation reached its ultimate stage. The last vestiges of humaninterconnection were severed,  for I  not only vanished physically  from thelecture hall but had my entire course taped so as to be funneled through theCollege  Closed Circuit into  the rooms of headphoned students. Rumor had itthat I was ready to quit;  in fact, an anonymous punster wrote in  the QuirnQuarterly,  Spring, 1959: "His  Temerity is said  to have asked for a  raisebefore emeriting."     In the summer  of that year  my third wife and  I saw  Bel for the lasttime. Allan Garden (after whom the genus of the Cape Jasmin should have beennamed, so great and  triumphant was  the flower in his buttonhole) had  justbeen  united in  wedlock  to his youthful Virginia, after  several years  ofcloudless concubinage. They  were  to  live  to the combined age of  170  inabsolute bliss, yet one  grim fateful chapter remained to be constructed.  Ifoiled over its first pages at the wrong desk, in the wrong hotel, above thewrong lake, with a view of the wrong isoletta  at  my  left elbow. The  onlyright  thing was  a pregnant-shaped  bottle of  Gattinara  before me. In themiddle  of a mangled sentence Louise  came to  join me from  Pisa,  where  Igathered--with  amused  indifference--that she  had  recoupled with a formerlover. Playing  on  the  strings  of  her  meek  uneasiness  I  took her  toSwitzerland, which  she detested. An early  dinner with Bel was sch e d u l e d   a t  t h e     L a r i v e   G r a n d   H o t e l .   S h e     a r r i v e d     w i t h     t h a t   C h r i s t - h a i r e d     y o u t h ,   b o t h  p u r p l e   t r o u s e r e d .   T h e   m a =t r e   d ' h Bt e l   m u r m u r e d   s o m e t h i n g     o v e r   t h e   m e n u   t o   m y  w i f e ,   a n d   s h e   r o d e   u p   a n d   b r o u g h t   d o w n   m y   o l d e s t   n e c k t i e   f o r   t h e     y o u n g   l o u t  t o   p u t   a r o u n d   his <194>  Adam's apple and scrawny neck. His grandmother  hadbeen related by marriage, so it  turned out, to a  third  cousin of Louise'sgrandfather, the not  quite untarnished Boston banker. This took care of themain course.  We  had coffee and  kirsch in the lounge,  and Charlie Everettshowed us pictures of  the  summer Camp for Blind Children (who were  sparedthe sight of its drab locust  trees and  rings of  ashed refuse  amidst  theriverside  burdocks) which he  and Bella (Bella!)  were supervising. He  wastwenty-five years  old. He had spent five years studying  Russian, and spokeit  as  fluently, he  said, as  a  trained  seal.  A  sample  justified  thecomparison. He  was a dedicated  "revolutionary," and a hopeless nincompoop,knowing nothing, crazy about jazz,  existentialism, Leninism,  pacifism, andAfrican  Art.  He thought  snappy  pamphlets  and  catalogues  so much  more"meaningful"  than  fat old  books.  A  sweet,  stale,  and  unhealthy smellemanated from the  poor  fellow. Throughout  the dinner  and coffee-drinkingordeal  I never once--never once, reader!--looked  up  at  my Bel, but as wewere about to part (forever) I did  look at her, and she had new  twin linesfrom nostrils to wicks, and she wore granny  glasses, and a middle part, andhad  lost  all  her  pubescent prettiness,  remnants  of  which  I had stillglimpsed during a  visit to  Larive a spring and winter ago. They  had to beback at half-past-twenty, alas--not really "alas."     "Come and see us at Quirn soon,  soon,  Dolly," I said, as we all stoodon the sidewalk with mountains outlined in solid black against an aquamarinesky, and choughs jacking harshly, flying in flocks to roost, away, away.     I  cannot explain the slip, but it angered Bel  more  than anything hadever angered her at any time.     "What is he saying?" she cried, looking in turn at Louise, at her beau,and again at Louise. "What does he mean? Why does he call me `Dolly'? Who isshe for God's sake? Why, why (turning to me), why did you say that?"     "Obmolvka,  prosti (lapse  of the  tongue,  sorry),"  I <195>  replied,dying,  trying  to turn everything into a dream, a  dream about that hideouslast moment.     They  walked briskly toward  their little Klop  car, he half-overtakingher, already poking the air with his car key, on her left, on her right. Theaquamarine  sky was now  silent, darkish and empty, save  for a  star-shapedstar about which I wrote a Russian elegy ages ago, in another world.     "What  a  charming,  good-natured,  civilized, sexy young fellow," saidLouise as we  stamped into  the lift.  "Are  you in the mood tonight?  Rightaway, Vad?" <196>PART FIVE     <197> <198>        1     This penultimate  part of LATH, this  spirited episode  in my otherwisesomewhat passive existence, is horribly hard  to  set down, reminding me  ofthe pensums, which the crudest of my French governesses used to inflict uponme--some old  saw to be copied cent  fois (hiss  and spittle)--in punishmentfor my adding my own marginal illustrations to those  in her Petit  Larousseor for exploring under the schoolroom table the legs  of Lalage L., a littlecousin,  who  shared lessons with  me  that unforgettable  summer.  I  have,indeed,  repeated  the  story  of   my  dash  to   Leningrad   in  the  latenineteen-sixties  innumerable times in  my mind, to packed  audiences of  myscribbling  or dreaming  selves--and yet I keep  doubting both the necessityand the success of my dismal task. But you have argued the question, you aretenderly adamant, yes,  and your decree is that I should relate my adventurein order to lend a semblance of significance to my daughter's futile fate.     In the  summer of 1960, Christine Dupraz,  who ran the  summer camp fordisabled children between  cliff and highway, just east  of Larive, informedme that Charlie Everett, one of her assistants, had eloped with my Bel afterburning--in a grotesque ceremony that she visualized more <199> clearly thanI--his  passport  and  a  little  American flag (bought at a souvenir  stallespecially for that purpose)  "right in  the  middle of the Soviet  Consul'sback  garden";  whereupon  the   new  "Karl   Ivanovich   Vetrov"   and  theeighteen-year-old Isabella,  a  ci-devant's daughter,  had gone through someform of mock marriage in Berne and incontinently headed for Russia.     The  same mail brought me an invitation  to discuss in New  York with afamous  comp                                                                                                 Er e     m y   s u d d e n   N u m b e r   O n e   p o s i t i o n     o n     t h e   B e s t s e l l i n g     A u t h o r s  l i s t ,     i n q u i r i e s   f r o m   J a p a n e s e ,   G r e e k ,     T u r k i s h   p u b l i s h e r s ,     a n d   a     p o s t c a r d  f r o m   P a r m a   w i t h     t h e     s c r a w l :   " B r a v o   f o r   K i n g d o m   f r o m   L o u i s e     a n d   V i c t o r . "   I  n e v e r   l e a r n e d   w h o   V i c t o r   w a s ,   b y   t h e   w a y .            B r u s h i n g     a l l   m y   e n g a g e m e n t s   a s i d e ,     I   s u r r e n d e r e d   a g a i n - - a f t e r   q u i t e   a  f e w   y e a r s   o f   a b s t i n e n c e ! - - t o   t h e   t h r i l l   o f   s e c r e t   i n v e s t i g a t i o n s .   S p y i n g   h a d  b e e n     m y   c l y s t Er e   d e     T c h 8k h o v   e v e n   b e f o r e   I     m a r r i e d   I r i s   B l a c k   w h o s e   l a t e r  p a s s i o n   f o r     w o r k i n g  on an interminable  detective tale had  been sparked bythis  or that hint I  must  have dropped,  like  a  passing bird's  lustrousfeather,  in relation to my  experience in the vast  and  misty field of theService. In my little way I have  been of some help to my betters. The tree,a blue-flowering  ash, whose  cortical wound I caught  the two  "diplomats,"Tornikovski and Kalikakov,  using  for  their correspondence,  still stands,hardly  scarred, on its  hilltop above  San  Bernardino. But for  structuraleconomy I have  omitted that entertaining strain from this story of love andprose. Its existence, however, helped  me now  to  ward off--for a while, atleast--the madness and anguish of hopeless regret.     It was child's play to find Karl's relatives in  the U.S.;  namely, twogaunt aunts who disliked the boy even  more than they did one  another. AuntNumber  One  assured  me  he  had never  left  Switzerland--they were  stillforwarding his Third Class mail to her in Boston. Aunt Number <200> Two, thePhiladelphia Fright, said he liked music and was vegetating in Vienna.     I had overestimated my forces. A serious  relapse  hospitalized me  fornearly a  whole year. The complete rest ordered by all  my doctors  was thenbotched by my having to stand by my publisher in a  long legal fight againstobscenity charges leveled at my  novel  by  stuffy censors. I was again veryill. I still feel the  pressure  of the hallucinations  that beset me, as mysearch for Bel got  somehow mixed up with the controversy over my novel, andI  saw  as clearly as one sees mountains or  ships, a  great  building,  allwindows lit,  trying to advance upon  me,  through this or that wall of  theward, seeking as it were a weak spot to push through and ram my bed.     In the late  Sixties I learned that  Bel  was now definitely married toVetrov but that he had been sent  to some remote place of unspecified  work.Then came a letter.     It was forwarded to me by an old  respectable businessman (I shall callhim A.B.) with a note  saying that he was  "in textiles" though by education"an  engineer"; that  he represented  "a  Soviet firm  in the U.S. and  viceversa"; that the  letter  he  was enclosing  came from a lady working in hisLeningrad office (I shall call her Dora)  and concerned my daughter "whom hedid not have the honor to know but who, he believed, needed my  assistance."He added  that he would  be flying back to Leningrad in a month's  time  andwould be glad if I "contacted him." The letter from Dora was in Russian.     Much-respected Vadim Vadimovich!     You probably receive many letters from people in our country who manageto obtain your books--not an easy  enterprise! The  present letter, however,is not from an admirer but simply from a friend of Isabella Vadimovna Vetrovwith <201> whom she has been sharing a room for more than a year now.     She  is  ill, she has  no news  from her husband, and she is  without akopek.     Please, get in  touch with  the bearer of this note. He is my employer,and also a distant relative,  and has agreed to bring a few  lines from you,Vadim Vadimovich, and a little money, if possible, but  the main thing,  themain thing (glavnoe, glavnoe) is to come in person (lichno). Let him know ifyou  can come and  if  yes, when  and  where we  could  meet  to discuss thesituation.  Everything  in life is  urgent (speshno, "pressing," "not to  bepostponed") but some things are dreadfully urgent and this is one of them.     In order to convince you that she is here, with me, telling me to writeyou  and unable to write herself, I am appending a little clue or token thatonly  you  and she  can decode: "...and the  intelligent  trail  (i  umnitsatropka)."     For a minute I  sat at  the  breakfast table--under  the  compassionatestare  of Brown Rose--in  the attitude  of a cave dweller clasping his handsaround his  head at  the  crash of  rocks breaking above him (women make thesame  gesture when something  falls in the  next room). My  decision was, ofcourse,  instantly  taken.  I  perfunctorily  patted  Rose's young  buttocksthrough her light skirt, and strode to the telephone.     A few hours later I was dining with A.B. in New York (and in the courseof the next month was to  exchange several long-distance calls with him fromLondon). He  was a  superb little man, perfectly oval in shape, with a  baldhead and  tiny feet expensively shod (the rest of  his  envelope looked lessclassy). He  spoke friable  English  with  a soft Russian accent, and nativeRussian with Jewish <202>  question marks. He thought that I should begin byseeing Dora. He settled for me the exact spot where she and I might meet. Hewarned me  that in  preparing to visit  the weird Wonderland  of the  SovietUnion a traveler's first step was the very Philistine one  of being assigneda nomer (hotel room) and that only  after  he had been granted one could the"visa" be tackled. Over the  tawny  mountain  of "Bogdan's"  brown-speckled,butter-soaked, caviar-accompanied bliny  (which  A.B. forbade  me to pay forthough I was lousy with A Kingdom's money), he spoke poetically, and at somelength, about his recent trip to Tel Aviv.     My next move--a visit to London--would have been altogether delightful,had  I not  been overwhelmed all the  time by anxiety, impatience, anguishedforebodings. Through several venturesome gentlemen--a former lover of  AllanAndoverton's  and two  of  my  late  benefactor's  mysterious  chums--I  hadretained some innocent ties with the  BINT, as  Soviet agents acronymize thewell-known, too  well-known, British  intelligence service. Consequently  itwas  possible for me to obtain a false or more-or-less false passport. SinceI may want to  avail myself again of those facilities, I cannot reveal  heremy exact alias. Suffice it to say that some  teasing similarity with my realfamily name could make the assumed one pass, if I got caught, for a clericalerror on the part of an absentminded consul and for indifference to officialpapers on that of  the deranged bearer. Let us  suppose my real name to havebeen "Oblonsky" (a Tolstoyan invention);  then the  false  one would be, forexample,  the mimetic "O. B. Long," an oblong blursky, so  to  speak. This Icould expand into, say,  Oberon Bernard Long,  of  Dublin or Dumberton,  andlive with it for years on five or six continents.     I had  escaped  from Russia at the  age of  not quite nineteen, leavingacross my path in a perilous  forest the felled body of a Red soldier. I hadthen dedicated half  a  century to berating,  deriding,  twisting into funnyshapes,  wringing <203>  out like blood-wet towels, kicking neatly in Evil'sstinkiest spot, and otherwise tormenting the Soviet regime at every suitableturn  of my writings. In  fact,  no  more consistent  critic  of  Bolshevistbrutality  and basic stupidity existed during all that time at  the literarylevel to which my output belonged. I was thus well  aware of two facts: thatunder my own name I would not be given a room at the Evropeyskaya or Astoriaor any  other Leningrad hotel  unless I made some extraordinary amends, someabjectly exuberant recantation; and  that if  I talked my way  to that hotelroom as  Mr.  Long  or Blong, and got  interrupted, there might be no end oftrouble. I decided therefore not to get interrupted.     "Shall I  grow a  beard to cross  the  fronder?" muses homesick GeneralGurko in Chapter Six of Esmeralda and Her Parandrus.     "Better than none," said Harley Q., one of my  gayest  advisers. "But,"he added, "do it before we glue on and  stamp O.B.'s  picture and don't loseweight afterwards." So I grew it--during the atrocious heartracking wait forthe room I could not mock up and the visa I could not forge. It was an ampleVictorian affair, of  a  nice,  rough, tawny  shade threaded with silver. Itreached up  to my  apple-red  cheekbones  and  came  down  to my  waistcoat,commingling on  the  way with my lateral yellow-gray  locks. Special contactlenses not  only  gave  another,  dumbfounded, expression  to my  eyes,  butsomehow  changed  their very shape from  squarish  leonine, to round Jovian.Only upon my return did I notice  that  the old tailor-made trousers,  on meand in my bag, displayed my real name on the inside of the waistband.     My good  old British passport,  which had  been handled cursorily by somany  courteous  officers who  had  never  opened  my  books  (the only realidentity papers of its accidental holder), remained, after a procedure, thatboth  decency and  incompetence forbid  me to describe, <204> physically thesame  in  many  respects;  but certain  of  its other  features,  details ofsubstance and  items  of information, were, let us say, "modified" by  a newmethod,  an  alchemysterious treatment, a  technique  of  genius, "still notunderstood elsewhere,"  as the chaps in the lab tactfully expressed people'sutter unawareness  of a  discovery that might have saved countless fugitivesand  secret agents.  In other words  nobody, no forensic chemist not in  theknow, could  suspect, let alone prove, that my passport  was false. I do notknow why  I dwell on this  subject with such tedious  persistence. Probably,because I otlynivayu--"shirk"--the task of describing my visit to Leningrad;yet I can't put it off any longer. <205>2     After almost three  months  of  fretting I  was ready  to  go.  I  feltlacquered from  head to foot, like that naked ephebe, the  bright  clou of apagan procession, who died of dermal asphyxia in his coat of golden varnish.A few days before my actual departure  there occurred what seemed a harmlessshift at the time. I was  to wing off on a Thursday  from Paris. On Monday amelodious female voice  reached me  at  my  nostalgically  lovely hotel, rueRivoli,  to tell me  that something---perhaps a  hushed-up crash in a Sovietveil  of  mist--had  clogged the general schedule and that I  could board anAeroflot turboprop to Moscow either  this Wednesday or the next. I chose theformer, of course, for it did not affect the date of my rendezvous.     My  traveling companions were a few  English and French  tourists and agoodish bunch of gloomy  officials from Soviet  trade missions. Once  insidethe aircraft, a certain illusion of cheap unreality enveloped  me--to lingerabout me for the rest  of my trip. It  was  a very warm day in June and  thefarcical air-conditioning  system failed to  outvie the whiffs of  sweat andthe sprayings of Krasnaya Moskva, an insidious perfume which imbued even thehard candy (named  Ledenets vzlyotnyy,  "take-off  caramel," on the wrapper)generously distributed  to us before the start <206> of  the flight. Anotherfairy-tale  touch   was  the  bright  dapple--yellow  curlicues  and  violeteyespots--adorning the blinds.  A  similarly  colored waterproof bag in  theseat pocket before me was  ominously  labeled "for waste  disposal"--such asthe disposal of my identity in that fairy-land.     My mood and  mental condition needed strong liquor rather than  anotherround of vzlyotnyy or some nice reading matter; still I accepted a publicitymagazine from a stout, unsmiling, bare-armed stewardess in sky blue, and wasinterested to learn  that (in contrast  to current triumphs)  Russia had notdone  so  well in  the  Soccer Olympics  of  1912  when  the  "Tsarist team"(consisting presumably of ten boyars  and one bear) lost  12-0  to a  Germanside.     I had taken a tranquilizer and hoped to sleep at least part of the way;but a  first, and  only,  attempt at dozing off was resolutely thwarted by astill fatter stewardess, in a still stronger aura  of onion sweat, asking menastily to draw in the leg that I had stuck out too far into the aisle whereshe circulated  with more  and more  publicity material. I  envied darkly mywindowside neighbor, an elderly Frenchman--or, anyway, scarcely a compatriotof mine--with  a straggly gray-black  beard and  a  terrible  tie, who sleptthrough the entire  five-hour flight,  disdaining the sardines  and even thevodka which I  could not resist, though I had a flask of better stuff  in myhip  pocket. Perhaps  historians of  photography could help  me some day  todefine  how, by precisely  what indices, I am enabled to establish  that therecollection of an anonymous unplaceable face goes back 1930-1935,  say, andnot to 1945-1950. My  neighbor was practically the twin of a  person  I  hadknown  in  Paris, but who?  A  fellow writer? A  concierge? A  cobbler?  Thedifficulty  of determination  grated  less than the riddle  of its limits assuggested by the degree of perceived "shading" and the  "feel" of the image.<207>     I got  a closer  but  still more teasing  look  at him when, toward theclose of our  journey,  my raincoat fell  from the rack and landed upon him,and he grinned amiably enough as  he emerged from under the sudden awakener.And I glimpsed again his fleshy profile  and thick eyebrow while  submittingfor inspection the  contents of my only  valise and fighting the insane urgeto question the propriety of the phrasing in the English form of the CustomsDeclaration:  "...miniature  graphics, slaughtered  fowl,  live animals  andbirds."     I saw him again, but not  as clearly, during our transfer by  bus  fromone airport to another through some  shabby environs of Moscow--a city whichI had never seen in my life and which  interested me about  as much as, say,Birmingham. On the plane  to  Leningrad,  however, he was  again next to me,this  time on the inner side. Mixed odors  of dour hostess and "Red Moscow,"with a gradual prevalence of the first  ingredient, as our bare-armed angelsmultiplied their last ministrations, accompanied us from 21:18 to 22:33.  Inorder to draw  out my neighbor before he  and  his  riddle vanished, I askedhim,  in  French, if  he knew anything  about a picturesque group  that  hadboarded our aircraft  in Moscow. He  replied, with a  Parisian grasseyement,that they  were, he believed, Iranian circus  people touring Europe. The menlooked like  harlequins  in  mufti,  the  women like birds  of paradise, thechildren  like golden  medallions, and there was one dark-haired pale beautyin black  bolero and yellow sharovars who reminded me of Iris or a prototypeof Iris.     "I hope," I said, "we'll see them perform in Leningrad."     "Pouf!" he rejoined. "They can't compete with our Soviet circus."     I noted the automatic "our."     Both he and I were billeted in the Astoria, a hideous pile built aroundWorld War One, I think. The heavily bugged (I had been taught by  Guy Gayleya way  of  finding that  <208> out in  one  gleeful twinkle)  and  thereforesheepish-looking  room "de luxe," with orange curtains  and an orange-drapedbed in  its old-world alcove, did have  a private bath as stipulated, but ittook me some time to cope with a convulsive  torrent of  clay-colored water."Red Moscow's" last stand took place on a cake of incarnadine soap. "Meals,"said a  notice,  "may be  served in the rooms." For the  heck of it  I triedordering an evening snack; nothing happened, and I spent another hungry hourin the recalcitrant restaurant. The Iron Curtain  is really a lampshade: itsvariety here was gemmed with glass  incrustations in a puzzle of petals. Thekotleta po kievski I ordered  took forty-four minutes to come from Kiev--andtwo seconds to be  sent back as a non-cutlet, with a  tiny oath (murmured inRussian) that made  the waitress start and  gape at  me and my Daily Worker.The Caucasian wine was undrinkable.     A sweet little scene  happened to be  enacted  as I hurried toward  thelift,  trying  to  recall where I  had  put my  blessed Burpies.  A  flushedathletic liftyorsha  wearing several bead necklaces was in  the act of beingreplaced by  a much  older woman of the pensioned type, at whom she  shoutedwhile stomping  out of  the lift:  "Ya  tebe eto popomnyu, sterva! (I'll geteven with  you, dirty  bitch)"--and proceeded  to barge into  me and  almostknock  me  down (I  am  a  large,  but  fluff-light old  fellow).  "Shtoy-tysuyoshsya  pod nogi?  (Why  do  you  get underfoot?)"  she cried in the sameinsolent tone  of voice which left the night attendant  quietly shaking  hergray head all the way up to my floor.     Between  two  nights, two  parts of a serial dream, in  which I  vainlytried to locate  Bel's street (whose  name, by a  superstition  current  forcenturies in  conspiratorial circles I had  preferred not to be told), whileknowing  perfectly well that she  lay bleeding  and  laughing  in  an alcovediagonally across the room, a few barefooted  steps from my  bed, I wanderedabout the city, idly trying  to derive some <209> emotional  benefit from mybeing born there almost  three-quarters of  a century ago. Either because itcould never  get over the presence of the bog  on which  a popular bully hadbuilt  it, or for some other reason (nobody, according to Gogol, knows), St.Petersburg was no place for children. I must have passed there insignificantparts of a few Decembers, and no doubt an April or two; but at least a dozenwinters of my  nineteen  pre-Cambridge ones were  spent on  Mediterranean orBlack Sea  coasts. As to  summers,  to  my  young summers,  all  of them hadbloomed for me on the great country estates of my family.  Thus  I  realizedwith  silly  astonishment  that,  except  for  picture postcards  (views  ofconventional public parks with lindens  looking like  oaks  and a  pistachiopalace instead of the remembered pinkish one, and relentlessly gilded churchdomes--all of it under an  Italianate sky), I had never  seen my native cityin June or July. Its  aspect, therefore, evoked no thrill of recognition; itwas  an unfamiliar, if  not utterly  foreign, town,  still lingering in someother era:  an  undefinable era, not exactly remote, but certainly precedingthe invention of body deodorants.     Warm weather had come to stay, and  everywhere, in travel agencies,  infoyers, in waiting rooms, in general stores,  in trolleybuses, in elevators,on escalators, in  every  damned corridor,  everywhere, and especially wherewomen worked, or  had worked, invisible  onion soup was cooking on invisiblestoves. I was to  remain only a couple of days in  Leningrad and had not thetime to get used to those infinitely sad emanations.     From travelers I knew that  our ancestral  mansion  no  longer existed,that the very lane where  it had stood between  two streets in the  Fontankaarea had been lost, like some connective  tissue in the  process of  organicdegeneration. What  then succeeded  in transfixing  my memory? That  sunset,with  a triumph of bronze clouds and flamingo-pink meltings  in the  far-endarchway of the Winter Canalet, <210> might  have been  first seen in Venice.What else? The shadow of railings  on granite?  To be quite honest, only thedogs,  the  pigeons,  the  horses, and the  very old,  very  meek  cloakroomattendants seemed familiar to me. They, and perhaps the fa                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  3a d e   o f   a   h o u s e   o n  G e r t s e n   S t r e e t .   I   m a y   h a v e   g o n e   t h e r e   t o   s o m e   c h i l d r e n ' s   f 9t e   a g e s     a g o .   T h e  f l o r a l   d e s i g n   r u n n i n g   a b o v e   t h e   r o w   o f     i t s   u p p e r     w i n d o w s     c a u s e d     a n   e e r i e  s h i v e r   t o   p a s s   t h r o u g h   t h e   r o o t   o f   w i n g s   t h a t   w e   a l l   g r o w   a t   s u c h   m o m e n t s   o f  d r e a m - like recollection.     Dora  was to meet  me Friday morning on the Square of the Arts in frontof  the Russian  Museum near the  statue  of Pushkin erected some  ten yearsbefore  by  a  committee of weathermen. An  Intourist  folder  had yielded atinted  photograph of  the  spot.  The  meteorological associations  of  themonument predominated  over its  cultural  ones.  Frock-coated  Pushkin, theright-side lap of  his garment  permanently  agitated  by  the Nevan  breezerather than by the violence of lyrical afflatus,  stands looking upward  andto the left while his right hand is stretched out  the other way,  sidewise,to test  the rain (a very natural attitude at  the  time lilacs bloom in theLeningrad parks). It had dwindled, when I arrived, to a warm drizzle, a meremurmur in the lindens above the long garden benches. Dora was supposed to besitting on Pushkin's left, id est my right. The bench  was  empty and lookeddampish. Three or four children, of the morose,  drab,  oddly  old-fashionedaspec t   t h a t     S o v i e t   k i d s     h a v e ,   c o u l d   b e     s e e n   o n     t h e     o t h e r     s i d e     o f     t h e  p e d e s t a l ,     b u t   o t h e r w i s e   I   w a s   l o i t e r i n g     a l l   a l o n e ,   h o l d i n g   t h e   H u m a n i t 8  i n  m y   h a n d   i n s t e a d   o f   t h e   W o r k e r   w h i c h   I   w a s   s u p p o s e d   t o   s i g n a l   w i t h   d i s c r e e t l y  b u t   h a d   n o t   b e e n   a b l e   t o   o b t a in that day. I  was in the act of spreading thenewspaper  on the  bench when  a lady with the  predicted limp  came along agarden  path toward me. She wore the, also expected, pastel-pink coat, had aclubfoot, and walked with  the aid  of a sturdy  cane.  She  also carried  adiaphanous little  umbrella  which had not  figured  in the  list  of  <211>attributes. I  dissolved in tears at once (though  I was farced with pills).Her gentle beautiful eyes were also wet.     Had I got A.B.'s telegram? Sent two days ago to my Paris address? HotelMoritz?     "That's garbled," I said, "and besides I left earlier. Doesn't  matter.Is she much worse?"     "No,  no,  on the  contrary. I knew  you would come all the  same,  butsomething has happened. Karl  turned up on Tuesday while I was in the officeand took  her  away. He also  took  my  new  suitcase. He  has no  sense  ofownership. He will be shot some day like a common  thief. The first time  hegot  into  trouble was  when he  kept  declaring that Lincoln and Lenin werebrothers. And last time--"     Nice voluble lady, Dora. What was Bel's illness exactly?     "Splenic  anemia. And last time,  he  told  his  best  student  in  thelanguage school that the only thing people should do was to love one anotherand pardon their enemies."     "An original mind. Where do you suppose--"     "Yes, but the best student was  an informer, and  Karlusha spent a yearin  a  tundrovyy House of  Rest. I don't know where he took her now.  I evendon't know whom to ask."     "But there must be  some  way. She must be brought  back, taken out  ofthis hole, this hell."     "That's impossible. She adores, she worships Karlusha. C'est la vie, asthe Germans say. It's a  pity A.B. is in Riga till the end of the month. Yousaw very little of him. Yes, it's a pity, he's a  freak and a dear (chudak idushka) with four nephews in Israel, which sounds, he says, as `the dramaticpersons  in a pseudoclassical play.' One of  them was my husband. Life  getssometimes very complicated,  and the more  complicated the happier it shouldbe, one  would  think,  but in reality  `complicated'  always means for somereason grust' i toska (sorrow and heartache)."     "But look here, can't I do something? Can't I sort of <212> hang aroundand make inquiries, and perhaps seek advice from the Embassy--"     "She  is not English any more and  was never American. It's hopeless, Itell you. We were very close, she  and I, in my  very complicated life, but,imagine,  Karl did not allow  her to  leave  at  least one  little word  forme--and for  you,  of course. She had informed him, unfortunately,  that youwere  coming, and  this he could not  bear in spite of all  the sympathy  heworks up for all  unsympathetic people.  You  know,  I  saw  your  face lastyear--or was it  two years  ago?--two years, rather--in  a  Dutch or  Danishmagazine, and I would have recognized you at once, anywhere."     "With the beard?"     "Oh,  it does  not  change  you one droplet.  It's like wigs  or  greenspectacles in old comedies. As a girl I dreamt  of becoming a  female clown,`Madam  Byron,'  or  `Trek  Trek.'  But  tell me, Vadim  Vadimovich--I  meanGospodin Long--haven't they found you out? Don't they intend to make much ofyou? After all, you're the secret pride of Russia. Must you go now?"     I detached  myself from  the  bench--with  some  scraps  of  L'Humanit                                                                                                                                               8 a t t e m p t i n g   t o   f o l l o w   m e - - a n d   s a i d ,   y e s ,     I     h a d   b e t t e r   b e     g o i n g   b e f o r e     t h e  p r i d e   o u t s t r i p p e d     t h e   p r u d e n c e .   I   k i s s e d     h e r     h a n d   w h e r e u p o n     s h e   r e m a r k e d  t h a t     s h e   h a d     s e e n   i t   d o n e   o n l y     i n     a   m o v i e     c a l l e d   W a r   a n d   P e a c e .     I   a l s o  b e g g e d   h e r ,   u n d e r   t h e   d ripping lilacs, to accept a wad of bank notes  to  beused for any purpose she wished including the price of that suitcase for hertrip to Sochi.  "And he also took my whole set of safety pins," she murmuredwith her all-beautifying smile. <213>3     I cannot be sure it was  not again my fellow traveler, the black-hattedman, whom  I saw hurrying away as I parted with Dora  and our National Poet,leaving the latter to worry forever about all that wasted water (compare theTsarskoselski  Statue of  a rock-dwelling  maiden  who mourns her broken butstill brimming jar in one of his own poems);  but I know I saw Monsieur Poufat least twice in the restaurant of the Astoria, as  well as in the corridorof the sleeping  car on the night train  that I took  in order to  catch theearliest Moscow-Paris plane. On  that plane he  was  prevented from  sittingnext to me by the presence of an elderly American lady, with pink and violetwrinkles  and rufous hair: we kept alternately chatting, dozing and drinkingBloody Marshas, her joke--not  appreciated by our sky-blue hostess.  It  wasdelightful to observe  the  amazement expressed  by old Miss Havemeyer  (herrather incredible name) when I  told her that I had  spurned the Intourist'soffer of a sightseeing tour of Leningrad; that I had not peeped into Lenin'sroom in the Smolny; had not visited one cathedral; had  not  eaten somethingcalled "tabaka chicken";  and that I had left that beautiful, beautiful citywithout seeing  a single ballet  or variety show. "I happen <214>  to be," Iexplained, "a  triple agent  and you know how it  is--" "Oh!" she exclaimed,with a pulling-away movement of the torso as if to consider me from a noblerangle. "Oh! But that's vurry glamorous!"     I had to wait  some time  for my  jet to  New  York, and being a littletight and  rather pleased with my plucky journey (Bel, after all was not toogravely ill and not too  unhappily married; Rosabel sat reading, no doubt, amagazine  in  the living  room, checking in it the Hollywood measurements ofher leg, ankle 8 1/2 inches, calf  12 1/2, creamy  thigh  19 1/2, and Louisewas in Florence or Florida). With a hovering grin, I noticed and picked up apaperback somebody had left on a seat next  to mine in the transit lounge ofthe Orly airport. I  was  the mouse of fate on that pleasant June  afternoonbetween a shop of wines and a shop of perfumes.     I held  in my hands  a copy of a Formosan (!) paperback reproduced fromthe American edition of A  Kingdom  by the  Sea. I had not seen it  yet--andpreferred not to inspect the pox of misprints that, no doubt, disfigured thepirated text. On the cover a  publicity picture of the child actress who hadplayed my  Virginia in  the recent  film did better  justice to  pretty LolaSloan  and  her  lollypop  than  to the significance  of my novel.  Althoughslovenly worded  by a hack  with no inkling  of the book's art, the blurb onthe back of the limp  little volume rendered  faithfully enough  the factualplot of my Kingdom.     Bertram, an unbalanced youth,  doomed to die  shortly in  an asylum forthe criminal insane, sells for ten dollars his ten-year-old  sister Ginny tothe middle-aged bachelor Al Garden,  a  wealthy  poet who  travels  with thebeautiful child from resort to resort through America and other countries. Astate  of  affairs  that looks  at  first blush--and "blush"  is  the  rightword--like a case of  irresponsible <215> perversion (described in brilliantdetail never  attempted  before) develops by  the  grees  [misprint]  into agenuine dialogue  of tender  love. Garden's  feelings  are  reciprocated  byGinny, the  initial "victim" who at eighteen, a normal nymph, marries him ina warmly described religious ceremony. All seems  to  end honky-donky [sic!]in foreverlasting bliss of a sort fit to meet the sexual demands of the mostrigid,  or frigid,  humanitarian, had there  not  been  running  its chaoticcourse, in a sheef [sheaf?] of parallel lives beyond our happy couple's ken,the tragic tiny [destiny?] of Virginia Garden's inconsolable parents, Oliverand [?], whom the clever author by every means  in his power,  prevents fromtracking their daughter Dawn [sic!!]. A Book-of-the-Decade choice.     I  pocketed  it  upon  noticing  that  my  long-lost  fellow  traveler,goat-bearded and black-hatted, as I knew him,  had come up from the lavatoryor the bar: Would he follow me to New York or was it to be our last meeting?Last, last. He  had given  himself away: The moment he came near, the momenthis  mouth  opened in  the  tense-lower-lip shape  that  discharges, with  acheerless up-and-down shake of the head, the exclamation "Ekh!,"  I knew notonly that he was as Russian as I, but that the ancient  acquaintance whom heresembled so strikingly was the father of a  young poet, Oleg  Orlov, whom Ihad  met in  Paris, in  the  Nineteen-Twenties. Oleg  wrote "poems in prose"(long  after  Turgenev), absolutely worthless  stuff,  which his  father,  ahalf-demented  widower, would  try  to  "place,"  pestering  with his  son'sworthless wares the dozen or so periodicals  of the  emigration. He could beseen in the waiting room miserably fawning on a harassed and curt secretary,or attempting to waylay an assistant editor <216> between office and toilet,or writing in stoic misery, at a corner of a crowded table, a special letterpleading  the  cause  of  some  horrible little  poem that had  been alreadyrejected. He died in the same Home for the  Aged where Annette's mother  hadspent her last years. Oleg, in the meantime,  h a d   j o i n e d   t h e   s m a l l   n u m b e r     o f  l i t t 8r a t e u r s     w h o   d e c i d e d   t o   s e l l     t h e   b l e a k   l i b e r t y   o f   e x p a t r i a t i o n   f o r   t h e  r o s y   m e s s   o f     S o v i e t   p o t t a g e .   H i s   b u d t i m e   h a d   k e p t     i t s   p r o m i s e .   T h e   b e s t   h e  h a d   a c h i e v e d   d u r i n g   t h e   l a s t   f o r t y   o r     f i f t y   y e a r s   w a s   a   m e d l e y   o f   p u blicitypieces, commercial translations, vicious  denunciations, and--in the  domainof  the  arts--a  prodigious  resemblance  to  the  physical  aspect, voice,mannerisms, and obsequious impudence of his father.     "Ekh!" he exclaimed,  "Ekh, Vadim Vadimovich dorogoy (dear), aren't youashamed  of  deceiving  our  great  warm-hearted  country,  our  benevolent,credulous  government,  our  overworked  Intourist  staff,  in   this  nastyinfantile  manner! A Russian writer! Snooping!  Incognito! By the way,  I amOleg Igorevich Orlov, we met in Paris when we were young."     "What  do you want, merzavetz (you scoundrel)?" I coldly inquired as heplopped into the chair on my left.     He  raised  both  hands in  the  "see-I'm-unarmed"  gesture:  "Nothing,nothing.  Except  to  ruffle  (potormoshit') your  conscience.  Two  coursespresented themselves.  We had to choose. Fyodor Mihaylovich  [?] himself hadto choose.  Either to welcome  you  po amerikanski (the  American  way) withreporters,  interviews,  photographers,  girls,  garlands,  and,  naturally,Fyodor Mihaylovich himself [President of  the Union of Writers? Head of  the`Big  House'?]; or else to  ignore you--and that's what we did. By the  way:forged passports may be  fun in detective  stories, but our people are  justnot interested in passports. Aren't you sorry now?"     I  made as  if to  move to another seat,  but  he  made as if <217>  toaccompany  me  there.  So  I  stayed where  I  was,  and  feverishly grabbedsomething to read--that book in my coat pocket.     "Et ce  n'est pas tout," he  went on. "Instead of writing for  us, yourcompatriots, you, a Russian writer of genius, betray them by concocting, foryour  paymasters,  this  (pointing with a  dramatically quivering index at AKingdom by the Sea in my hands), this obscene novelette about little Lola orLotte, whom some Austrian Jew or reformed pederast rapes after murdering hermother--no, excuse me--marrying  mama first before murdering her--we like tolegalize everything in the West, don't we, Vadim Vadimovich?"     Still restraining myself, though aware of  the uncontrollable  cloud ofblack  fury growing within  my  brain, I said: "You are mistaken. You  are asomber imbecile. The novel  I wrote, the novel I'm holding now, is A Kingdomby the Sea. You are talking of some other book altogether."     "Vraiment? And  maybe you visited Leningrad  merely to chat with a ladyin pink under  the  lilacs?  Because, you know,  you  and your  friends  arephenomenally na             >v e .   T h e   r e a s o n   M i s t e r     ( i t   r h y m e d   w i t h   ` E a s t e r '   i n     h i s   f o u l  s e r p e n t - m o u t h )     V e t r o v     w a s     p e r m i t t e d     t o   l e a v e   a     c e r t a i n     l a b o r     c a m p     i n  V a d i m - - o d d   c o i n c i d e n c e - - s o   h e     m i g h t     f e t c h   h i s     w i f e ,   i s     t h a t     h e   h a s   b e e n  c u r e d   n o w     o f   h i s     m y s t i c a l   m a n i a - - c u r e d  by such nutcrackers, such shrinkersas are absolutely unknown in the philosophy of your Western sharlatanchy. Ohyes, precious (dragotsennyy) Vadim Vadimovich--"     The swing I dealt old Oleg  with the back  of my left fist was of quitepresentable  power,  especially  if  we remember--and I remembered it  as  Iswung--that our combined ages made 140.     There ensued a  pause while I struggled  back to my  feet (unaccustomedmomentum had somehow caused me to fall from my seat).     "Nu,  dali  v  mordu. Nu, tak chtozh?"  he muttered <218> (Well, you'vegiven  me one  in  the mug. Well, what does it matter?).  Blood blotched thehandkerchief he applied to his fat muzhikian nose.     "Nu, dali," he repeated and presently wandered away.     I  looked at my  knuckles. They were  red but intact. I listened  to mywristwatch. It ticked like mad. <219> <220>PART SIX     <221> <222>        1     Speaking of philosophy, I  recalled when  starting to readjust  myself,very temporarily, to the corners and crannies of Quirn, that somewhere in myoffice I kept  a  bundle  of  notes (on  the Substance of  Space),  preparedformerly  toward an account of  my  young years and nightmares (the work nowknown as  Ardis). I also needed to  sort  out and remove from my  office, orruthlessly destroy, a mass of miscellanea which had accumulated ever since Ibegan teaching.     That afternoon--a  sunny and windy September afternoon--I  had decided,with  the  unaccountable suddenness of genuine  inspiration,  that 1969-1970would be  my last term at Quirn University. I had,  in fact,  interrupted mysiesta that day  to request an immediate interview with the Dean. I  thoughthis  secretary  sounded a  little grumpy on  the phone; true,  I declined toexplain  anything  beforehand,  beyond  confiding  to  her,  in an  informalbantering manner, that the numeral "7"  always reminded me  of  the  flag anexplorer sticks in the cranium of the North Pole.     After setting out on foot and reaching  the  seventh poplar  I realizedthat  there might be quite a load  of papers to  bring from my office, so  Iwent  back  for my car, and <223> then had difficulty in finding  a place topark  near  the library where  I intended  to return a number of books whichwere months, if not  years, overdue. In result,  I was a little  late for myappointment with the Dean, a new  man  and not my best reader. He consulted,rather demonstratively, the clock and muttered he  had  a  "conference" in afew minutes at some other place, probably invented.     I was amused rather than surprised by the vulgar joy he did not troubleto conceal at  the news of my resignation. He hardly heard the reasons whichcommon  courtesy  impelled  me  to give  (frequent headaches,  boredom,  theefficiency  of  modern recording,  the comfortable  income  my recent  novelsupplied,  and  so  forth). His  whole manner  changed--to use  a clich                                                                                                                         8    h e  d e s e r v e s .   H e   p a c e d   t o   a n d     f r o ,   p o s i t i v e l y   b e a m i n g .     H e   g r a s p e d   m y   h a n d   i n   a  b u r s t     o f   b r u t a l     e f f u s i o n .     C e r t a i n   f a s t i d i o u s   b l u e - b l o o d e d     a n i m a l s   p r e f e r  s u r r e n d e r i n g     a     l i m b   t o   t h e   p r e d a t o r   r a t h e r   t h a n   s u f f e r     i g n o b l e   c o n t a c t .   I  l e f t   t h e     D e a n     e n c umbered with a  marble arm that he  kept  carrying in hisprowlings like a trayed trophy, not knowing where to put it down.     So off to my office I stalked, a happy amputee, more than ever eager toclean up drawers and shelves. I began, however, by dashing off a note to thePresident of the University, another new man,  informing him with a touch ofFrench malice, rather  than  English "malice," that  my  entire  set of  onehundred lectures on European Masterpieces was about to be sold to a generouspublisher who offered  me  an advance  of half-a-million bucks (a salubriousexaggeration), thus making transmissions of my course no longer available tostudents, best regards, sorry not to have met you personally.     In  the name  of moral hygiene I had got rid  long ago of  my Bechsteindesk.  Its  considerably  smaller  substitute contained  note paper, scratchpaper,  office  envelopes, photostats  of  my lectures, a  copy of  Dr. OlgaRepnin  (hard-back)  which  I had  intended for  a colleague  (but had <224>spoiled by  misspelling his name), and a pair of warm gloves belonging to myassistant (and  successor) Exkul. Also three boxfuls  of  paper clips  and ahalf-empty flask of whisky. From the shelves, I swept into the  wastebasket,or onto the floor in its vicinity, heaps of circulars, separata, a displacedecologist's  paper  on  the ravages committed by a  bird of  some sort,  theOzimaya Sovka ("Lesser Winter-Crop Owl"?), and  the tidily bound page proofs(mine always  come  in  the  guise of long, horribly  slippery  and unwieldysnakes) of  picaresque  trash, full of  cricks and punts, imposed  on  me byproud  publishers hoping  for a  rave  from the  lucky  bastard. A  mess  ofbusiness  correspondence and my tractatule on Space I  stuffed  into a largeworn folder. Adieu, lair of learning!     Coincidence  is  a pimp  and  cardsharper in  ordinary  fiction  but  amarvelous  artist  in  the  patterns  of fact recollected  by a non-ordinarymemoirist.  Only asses and  geese think that the re-collector skips  this orthat  bit of his past  because it is  dull  or shoddy (that sort  of episodehere, for example, the  interview with the Dean, and how scrupulously it  isrecorded!). I  was on the way to the parking lot when the bulky folder undermy  arm--replacing my  arm,  as it  were--burst its string  and  spilled itscontents all  over  the gravel and grassy  border.  You were coming from thelibrary along the same campus path, and we crouched side by side  collectingthe  stuff.  You were  pained you said later (zhalostno  bylo) to  smell theliquor on my breath. On the breath of that great writer.     I say "you"  retroconsciously, although in the logic of  life you  werenot "you" yet, for  we were not actually acquainted and  you  were to becomereally "you" only when you said,  catching a slip  of yellow  paper that wasavailing itself of a bluster to glide away with false insouciance:     "No, you don't." <225>     Crouching, smiling, you helped me to cram  everything  again  into  thefolder  and then  asked  me  how  my  daughter  was--she  and  you had  beenschoolmates some fifteen years ago, and my wife had given you a lift severaltimes. I  then remembered your name and in a photic flash of celestial colorsaw you and Bel looking like twins, silently hating each other, both in bluecoats and  white hats, waiting to be driven somewhere by Louise. Bel and youwould both be twenty-eight on January 1, 1970.     A yellow butterfly settled briefly on a  clover head, then wheeled awayin the wind.     "Metamorphoza," you said in your lovely, elegant Russian.     Would I care to have some snapshots (additional  snapshots) of Bel? Belfeeding a chipmunk? Bel at the school dance? (Oh, I remember that dance--shehad chosen  for  escort a sad fat Hungarian boy whose father  was  assistantmanager of the Quilton Hotel--I can still hear Louise snorting!)     We met next morning in my carrel at the College Library, and after thatI continued to see you every day.  I will not suggest, LATH  is not meant tosuggest, that the  petals and  plumes  of my  previous  loves  are dulled orcoarsened when directly contrasted with the purity of your being, the magic,the pride, the reality of your radiance. Yet "reality" is the key word here;and the gradual perception of that reality was nearly fatal to me.     Reality  would be only adulterated if I now started to narrate what youknow, what  I  know, what nobody  else knows,  what shall  never,  never  beferreted out by a matter-of-fact, father-of-muck, mucking biograffitist. Andhow did your  affair develop, Mr.  Blong? Shut up, Ham Godman! And  when didyou decide to leave together for Europe? Damn you, Ham!     See under Real, my first novel in English, thirty-five years ago! <226>     One little item of subhuman interest I  can disclose, however, in  thisinterview with posterity.  It is a foolish, embarrassing trifle  and I nevertold you about it, so  here goes. It was on the eve of our departure, aroundMarch 15, 1970, in a New York  hotel. You were out shopping. ("I think"--yousaid to me just now  when  I tried to check  that detail without telling youwhy--"I think I bought a beautiful blue  suitcase with a zipper"--miming theword with a little movement of your dear delicate hand--"which  proved to beabsolutely useless.") I stood before the closet mirror of my bedroom  in thenorth end of our pretty "suite," and proceeded to take a final decision. Allright,  I  could  not live without you; but was I  worthy of you--I mean, inbody and  spirit? I was forty-three years older  than you. The Frown of Age,two deep lines forming a capital lambda, ascended  between  my  eyebrows. Myforehead,   with  its  three  horizontal   wrinkles   that  had  not  reallyoverasserted themselves in the last three decades, remained round, ample andsmooth,  waiting  for the summer tan that would scumble,  I knew,  the liverspots  on my  temples.  All in all, a  brow to  be enfolded  and fondled.  Athorough haircut had done  away with the leonine locks; what remained was ofa neutral, grayish-dun tint.  My large handsome glasses magnified the senilegroup of wart-like little excrescences  under each  lower  eyelid. The eyes,once  an irresistible hazel-green, were now  oysterous. The nose,  inheritedfrom a succession of Russian boyars, German  barons, and, perhaps  (if CountStarov who sported some English blood was my real father), at least one Peerof the Realm, had retained its bone hump and  tip rime, but had developed onthe frontal  flesh, within its  owner's memory, an  aggravating gray hairletthat grew faster and faster between yanks. My dentures did not do justice tomy  former  attractively irregular teeth and  (as  I  told an  expensive butobtuse dentist who did  not  understand what I meant)  "seemed  to ignore mysmile." A furrow  sloped <227> down  from each nosewing, and a jowl pouch oneach side of  my chin formed in three-quarter-face the banal flexure  commonto old men of all races, classes, and professions. I doubted that I had beenright  in shaving off  my glorious beard  and the  trim  mustache  that  hadlingered, on try, for a week or so after  my return from Leningrad. Still, Ipassed my face, giving it a C-minus mark.     Since I had never been much of an athlete, the deterioration of my bodywas neither very marked, nor  very interesting.  I gave it  a C plus, mainlyfor my routing  tank  after tank  of belly fat in  a  war with obesity wagedbetween intervals of retreat and  rest since the middle Fifties. Apart  fromincipient lunacy (a problem with which I prefer  to deal separately),  I hadbeen in excellent health throughout adulthood.     What about  the state of my art?  What could I  offer to you there? Youhad studied, as I hope you recall, Turgenev in Oxford and Bergson in Geneva,but thanks to family ties with good  old Quirn and Russian New York (where alast migr periodical  was  still  deploring,  with idiotic innuendoes,  my"apostasy") you had followed pretty closely, as I discovered, the processionof  my  Russian  and  English  harlequins,  followed  by  a  tiger  or  two,scarlet-tongued, and a libellula girl on an elephant.  You had also  studiedthose obsolete photocopies--which proved that my  method avait du  bon afterall--pace the monstrous accusations leveled at  them by a pack of professorsin envious colleges.     As  I peered,  stripped  naked  and  traversed  by  opaline  rays, intoanother, far deeper  mirror,  I saw  the whole vista of my Russian books andwas  satisfied and even thrilled  by  what I  saw:  Tamara,  my first  novel(1925): a girl  at sunrise in the mist of an orchard. A grandmaster betrayedin Pawn Takes Queen. Plenilune,  a moonburst  of verse. Camera  Lucida,  thespy's mocking eye among the meek blind. The Red Top Hat of decapitation in acountry  <228> of total injustice. And my  best  in  the series:  young poetwrites prose on a Dare.     That Russian batch of my  books was finished and signed and thrust backinto the  mind  that had  produced  them.  All of  them  had  been graduallytranslated  into  English either by myself  or under my direction,  with  myrevisions. Those final English versions as well  as  the reprinted originalswould be  now  dedicated  to  you.  That  was good. That  was settled.  Nextpicture:     My English originals, headed  by the fierce See under Real (1940),  ledthrough the changing light of Esmeralda and Her Parandrus, to the fun of Dr.Olga  Repnin and  the dream  of A Kingdom by  the  Sea. There  was  also thecollection of short stories Exile from Mayda) a distant  island;  and Ardis,the work I had resumed at the time  we met--at the time, too, of a deluge ofpostcards (postcards!) from  Louise hinting at last at a move which I wantedher to be the first to make.     If I estimated the second batch at a lower value than the first, it wasowing not only to a diffidence some will  call coy, others, commendable, andmyself,  tragic, but also because  the contours  of my  American  productionlooked  blurry to me; and they looked that way because I knew I would alwayskeep  hoping  that  my  next  book--not simply  the one  in  progress,  likeArdis--but  something  I had never  attempted yet, something miraculous  andunique, would at last answer fully the craving, the aching thirst that a fewdisjunct  paragraphs in  Esmeralda and  The  Kingdom  were  insufficient  toquench. I believed I could count on your patience. <229>2     I had not the slightest desire to reimburse Louise  for being forced toshed me; and  I hesitated to embarrass her by supplying my lawyer  with  thelist of  her  betrayals. They were stupid  and sordid, and went back to  thedays when I still was reasonably faithful to her. The "divorce dialogue," asHorace Peppermill, Junior, horribly  called it, dragged on during the entirespring: You and I spent part of it in London and the rest in Taormina, and Ikept  putting off talks  of  our marriage (a  delay  you regarded with royalindifference).  What  really bothered  me was  having  also  to postpone thetedious statement (to be repeated for the fourth time in my life) that wouldhave to precede any such talks. I  fumed. It was a shame to leave you in thedark regarding my derangement.     Coincidence, the angel  with the eyed wings mentioned before, spared methe humiliating rigmarole that  I had found necessary  to go  through beforeproposing to each of my former wives. On June 15, at Gandora, in the Tessin,I received a  letter from young Horace giving me excellent news: Louise  haddiscovered (how does not  matter) that at  various periods of our marriage Ihad had her  shadowed, in all sorts of fascinating  old cities, by a privatedetective (Dick Cockburn, a staunch friend of mine); that the tapes <230> oflove calls and other documents were in  my lawyer's  hands; and that she wasready to make every possible concession  to speed up matters, being  anxiousto marry again--this time the son of an  Earl.  And on the same fatidic day,at  a  quarter  past five in the afternoon, I finished transcribing  on  733medium-sized  Bristol   cards  (each  holding  about  100  words),  with   afine-nibbed pen and in my smallest  fair-copy hand, Ardis, a stylized memoirdealing with the arbored boyhood and ardent youth of a great thinker  who bythe  end of the book tackles the itchiest of all noumenal mysteries.  One ofthe  early chapters contained an account  (couched  in  an overtly personal,intolerably tortured tone)  of my own tussles with the Specter  of Space andthe myth of Cardinal Points.     By 5:30 I  had consumed, in a fit of private  celebration, most of  thecaviar and all the champagne in the friendly fridge of our bungalow  on  thegreen grounds of the  Gandora Palace  Hotel. I found  you on the veranda andtold you I would like you to devote the next hour to reading attentively--     "I read everything attentively."     "--this batch  of thirty cards from Ardis"  After which I  thought  youmight meet me somewhere on my way back from my late-afternoon stroll: alwaysthe  same--to  the  spartitraffico fountain (ten minutes) and thence  to theedge of a pine  plantation (another ten minutes).  I left you reclining in alounge  chair with the sun reproducing the amethyst lozenges of  the verandawindows  on the floor, and  barring  your bare shins and the insteps of yourcrossed feet (right toe twitching now and then  in  some obscure  connectionwith the  tempo of assimilation  or a  twist  in the text). In a  matter  ofminutes you  would have learned (as only  Iris had  learned  before you--theothers were no eaglesses)  what I wished you to  be aware of when consentingto be my wife. "Careful,  please,  when you cross," you said,  without <231>raising your eyes but then looking  up and tenderly pursing your lips beforegoing back to Ardis.     Ha!  Weaving a  little! Was that really I, Prince Vadim Blonsky, who in1815 could have outdrunk Pushkin's mentor, Kaverin? In the golden light of amere  quart of  the stuff  all  the  trees  in the  hotel  park  looked likearaucarias. I congratulated  myself on the neatness  of my  stratagem thoughnot quite knowing  whether it concerned  my third wife's recorded frolics orthe disclosure  of my infirmity through a bloke  in a book. Little by littlethe soft spicy air did me  good:  my soles  clung more firmly to gravel  andsand, clay and stone.  I  became aware that  I  had gone out wearing moroccoslippers and a torn, bleached denim trousers-and-top with, paradoxically, mypassport in one  nipple pocket and a wad  of Swiss bank notes in the  other.Local people in Gandino or   G a n d o r a ,   o r     w h a t e v e r     t h e   t o w n   w a s     c a l l e d ,   k n e w  t h e   f a c e   o f   t h e   a u t h o r   o f   U n   r e g n o   s u l   m a r e   o r   E i n   K 6n i g r e i c h     a n   d e r   S e e   o r  U n     R o y a u m e   a u   B o r d   d e   l a     M e r ,   s o   i t   w o u l d   h a v e     b e e n   r e a l l y     f a t u o u s   o n   m y  p a r t   t o   p r e p a r e   t h e   c u e   a n d   t h e   c u d   f o r     t h e   r e a d e r in case a car was reallyto hit me.     Soon  I was  feeling so  happy and  bright  that  when I passed  by thesidewalk cafe  just before reaching the square, it  seemed  a  good  idea tostabilize  the  fizz  still  ascending  in  me  by  means  of  a  jigger  ofsomething--and  yet  I  demurred,  and  passed  by,  cold-eyed,  knowing howsweetly, yet firmly, you disapproved of the most innocent tippling.     One of the  streets projecting west beyond the traffic island traversedthe Corso  Orsini  and  immediately afterwards,  as if  having  achieved  anexhausting feat,  degenerated  into a  soft dusty old  road  with traces  ofgramineous growth on both sides, but none of pavement.     I could say what I do not remember  having  been moved to say in years,namely: My happiness was complete. As I walked, I read those cards with you,at  your  pace, your <232> diaphanous index at  my  rough peeling temple, mywrinkled finger at  your turquoise temple-vein. I caressed the facets of theBlackwing pencil you kept  gently  twirling, I felt against my raised  kneesthe  fifty-year-old folded  chessboard, Nikifor  Starov's gift (most  of thenoblemen were badly chipped in their baize-lined mahogany box!),  propped onyour skirt with its pattern  of irises. My eyes moved with  yours, my pencilqueried with your own  faint little cross in the  narrow margin a solecism Icould not  distinguish  through  the tears of space.  Happy tears,  radiant,shamelessly happy tears!     A goggled imbecile on a motorcycle who I thought had  seen me and wouldslow down to let me cross Corso Orsini in peace swerved so clumsily to avoidkilling  me that he skidded and ended up  facing  me some  way off  after anignominious  wobble. I  ignored his  roar  of  hate and  continued my steadystroll westward in the  changed  surroundings I have  already mentioned. Thepractically rural old road crept between modest villas, each in  its nest oftall flowers and  spreading  trees. A rectangle of  cardboard on one of  thewest-side wickets said "Rooms"  in German; on the opposite side an old  pinesupported  a  sign  "For  Sale"  in Italian.  Again  on  the  left,  a  moresophisticated houseowner offered "Lunchings." Still fairly far was the greenvista of the pineta.     My thoughts reverted to Ardis. I knew that the  bizarre mental flaw youwere now reading about  would pain  you;  I also knew that its display was amere formality  on my  part and could  not obstruct the  natural flow of ourcommon  fate.  A gentlemanly gesture. In fact, it might  compensate for whatyou  did not yet know, what I  would have to tell you  too, what I suspectedyou would call the not quite savory  little method  (gnusnovaten'kiy sposob)of  my "getting even"  with Louise.  All right--but what  about Ardis? Apartfrom my warped mind, did you like it or loathe it? <233>     Composing, as I do, whole books in  my  mind before releasing the innerword and taking it down in pencil or pen, I find that the final text remainsfor a while committed to memory,  as       -  <  N  U  V  X  d  i  {  |                      	  	  	   	  -	  O	  ^	  i	  q	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
  
  "
  '
  8
  9
  ;
  D
  F
  H
  (  1      c             !  !  $%  ܮܮܮܮܮܮܮܮܮܮܮܧܮܮܮܮ    j8  h@ Uh@ 6] h@ 6]mH	sH	 j   h@ Uh@ 5\mH	sH	 j    h@ Uh&I7 mH	sH	 h@ mH	sH	 h@ OJ PJ QJ ^J mH	sH	 h@ mHsH h@ >         -  .  /  T  U  W  X  j  k                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       2 (
Px4 #\'*.25@9                ^      U                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           	  	  J	  d	  w	  x	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
  -
  .
  7
  8
  :
  ;
  D
  E
  F
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             2 (
Px4 #\'*.25@9                ^   F
  H
  I
  J
  
  
  1  ~      e  o    	  V      =      $    T                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     2 (
Px4 #\'*.25@9                ^   :    n    Q      %  r      @      '  t      [      B      )  v      ]                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          ]      D      +  x      _      F      -   z      !  a!  !  !  H"  "  "  /#  |#  #  $                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          $  c$  $  $  #%  $%  &%  '%  (%  u%  %  &  \&  &  &  C'  '  '  *(  w(  (  )  ^)  )  )  !*                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             2 (
Px4 #\'*.25@9                ^   $%  &%  K%  N%  %(  )(   ,  ,  1  1  1  	?  ?  $?  -?  0?  H?  D  D  [E  iE  UF  YF  \G  qG  &I  (I  KJ  RJ  )M   N  N  N  \N  `N  TW  ZW  \W  Y  Y   ^  ^  e  e  g  g  hh  jh  o  o  q  	q  Qq  Rq  W}  X}  }  }  ƀ  Ԁ  ր  ڀ              4  9  k  s      \  `  p  t               h@ 6] h@  h@ 6]mH	sH	 h@ mH	sH	 h@ OJ PJ QJ ^J mH	sH	S!*  n*  *  ,  ,  D-  -  <.  .  .  #/  p/  /  0  0  H1  1  >2  i2  2  3  P3  3  3  74  4  4  4  !5  D5                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          D5  5  5  +6  <6  6  6  #7  O7  7  7  68  8  8  9  f9  9   :  M:  :  :  4;  ;  ;  <  h<  <  =  O=  =                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          =  =  6>  >  >  ?  d?  ?  ?  K@  @  @  ,A  yA  A  B  `B  B  B  GC  C  C  .D  {D  D  E  bE  E  E  IF                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          IF  F  F  0G  }G  G  .H  H  bI  I  KJ  J  J  2K  K  K  L  fL  L   M  BN  ZN  \N  `N  bN  dN                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             2 (
Px4 #\'*.25@9                ^   dN  N  O  P  eP  P  P  LQ  Q  Q  Q  LR  R  R  3S  S  S  T  gT  T  T  U  `U  U  U  V  (W  W  .X  {X                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          {X  X  X  :Y  Y  Y  !Z  nZ  Z  [  U[  [  [  <\  \  \  #]  X^  ^  v_  `  U`  `  `  <a  a  a  #b  pb  b                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          b  
c  Wc  c  c  >d  d  d  %e  re  e  e  e  e  e  e  >f  f  f  %g  rg  g  h  Yh  h  h                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             2 (
Px4 #\'*.25@9                ^   h  @i  gi  i  j  Nj  j  j  5k  k  k  l  il  l  m  Pm  m  m  7n  n  n  o  ko  o  p  Rp  p  p  9q  q                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          q  q   r  Lr  r  r  3s  s  s  t  gt  t  u  Nu  u  u  5v  v  v  v  )w  vw  w  x  ]x  x  x  Dy  y  y                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          y  +z  xz  z  {  _{  {  {  F|  |  |  -}  z}  }  }  H~  ~  ~  /  |    ,  ƀ  `      g      N                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          N      5    τ    i    ǅ    a      H      /  |  Ɉ    c      J      1  ~  ˋ                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          ˋ    e      L                 M      4    Ώ    b      I                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 2 (
Px4 #\'*.25@9                ^     0  @    ڒ  '  e  v  Ó    2        H  t      -  z      N    ٗ  &  s    ֘  #                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          #  p      Q        N      5    Ϝ    i      P      7    ϟ    i      P                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              X  Z  a  d  A  D  M  P        "  ʬ  ڬ  ܬ           2  4  @  B  b  d  v  x              ֭  ح              >  @  R  T  n  p          Į  Ʈ  Ю  Ү  ܮ  ޮ          "  B  D  X  Z  l  n          د  گ          ɰ  0  O         
    $  &  2  N  6  D   h@ 6] h@ 6]mH	sH	 h@ mH	sH	[    7    Ѣ    k  u  £    \      C    ݥ  *  P      7    ѧ    k      7    ѩ                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          ѩ    k      R      r      
  F    ĭ  ƭ    ^        0  r        I      0                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          0  }  8  Ҳ  l      Դ      ,  ƶ  `    '  t      6  7  9  :  ;    չ  "                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             2 (
Px4 #\'*.25@9                ^   D  F  J  t    X        R  Y          7  9  d  i  j  x          8  >                l  n    "  $             $                       >  D  P  Z              Z  f  h  x  z            e  k  {                   h@ OJ PJ QJ ^J mH	sH	 h@  h@ mH	sH	 h@ 6]mH	sH	 h@ 6]S"  o    	  V      =    ׼  $  q      7    Ǿ    a      H      /  |      ,  y                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          y      .  {        k      R  {      _      F        >      %  r                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  h      1  ~      e      L    V        _      F      -  z      X                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                ?      &  ;      "  o    	  V  s    D    x      F    =  o    	  V      z                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          z      $  q  y      `      N    A        [      B        X      5                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  i      2                <      #  p  z      a      H                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               2 (
Px4 #\'*.25@9                ^         g        6    5        `      G  V        c      J      1  ~                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                e        ^      E        J      f  x      #  p        d    (    \                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                j  z  |            , . 8    	 	   V _   0 2 " " " " $ $ % % ( ( #( ((  * * * * -  . . 
.  2 2 4 4 W9 [9 *> <> >> D> V> X> $A  B B B AD OD sD uD GI YI P P De Ge f f i i j j co qo r  h@ OJ PJ QJ ^J mH	sH	 h@  h@ mH	sH	 h@ 6]mH	sH	 h@ 6]S\  H   / |    ^    [  <  p   a   H	 	 	 /
 _
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         
 
   m y   `   G   . {   b i   P   7    k                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            R   0 }   d   K   2    U   <   # p                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 L    P   7   <  p   R      9! ! !  " m"                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              2 (
Px4 #\'*.25@9                ^ m" " # T# # # $ _$ $ $ % $% q% % % & i& & & =' ' ' ' L( ( ( 3) ]) ) Z*                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Z* * + , a, s, , - t. . / 0 >0 0 0  1 m1 $2 2 2 f3  4 4 b4 4 4 I5 5 5 06                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         06 }6 6 7 d7 |7 7 8 \8 8 8 C9 9 9 *: w: : ; ^; ; ; < k< < = Q= = = `> >                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         > ? ? L@ @ @ A bB B C D eD rD sD uD vD wD D E ^E E E EF F F ,G                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            2 (
Px4 #\'*.25@9                ^   ,G yG G H `H H H GI YI I I @J J J 'K tK K L [L L L BM }M M N dN N N KO O                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         O O P UP P P <Q Q Q #R <R R R #S pS {S S T bT T T :U U U !V nV V W UW W                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         W W <X X X #Y pY Y Y Z dZ Z Z ;[ [ [ "\ J\ \ \ 1] ~] ] ^ e^ ^ ^ E_ _ _                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         _ ,` y` ` a `a a a Gb b b .c {c c d bd d d Ce De Ge He Ie e e 0f                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            2 (
Px4 #\'*.25@9                ^   0f }f f g dg mg g h Th h h ;i yi i j Yj j j @k k k  l Ml wl l l m gm m n                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         n Nn n n o o co qo o o "p op p 	q Vq q q  r &r sr r r r Fs s s -t zt t u                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         r r Gt St t t t t t u bw pw  x x +z /z z z | 0|   
  L [     x ~     & F L   h n t z   w ~   b h w      (       Ƶ ϵ   ҽ ս   E O   S ` z ]  )     h@ 6] h@ OJ PJ QJ ^J mH	sH	 h@  h@ mH	sH	 h@ 6]mH	sH	Su au u u <v v v #w *w ww x *y y /z |z z z B{ { { )| v| | } ]} } } D~ ~ ~                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         ~ + x   _   F Z   A  ۂ ( u   Y   1 ~ ˅  e   L                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         L    :  Ԉ ! n   U   <  ֋  7  ь  k   R   9                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ӏ   m   T ~     ё < ֒ p  R   9  ӕ   m                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             2 (
Px4 #\'*.25@9                ^     T } ʗ  d   K   2  ̚   M   4  ̜  f    M   4                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         4  Ο  N z Ǡ  a   4  ΢  h   O U   <  ֥ # p   >                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         >  ا % r   Y   @ e   L   3  ͬ  4    @ گ :                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             4    H  >  ش % r  ٵ & s   Z   A  ۸ ( u   5                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         5  Ϻ  i   P    T  ѽ ҽ ս ֽ ׽ $ q   X   ?                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            2 (
Px4 #\'*.25@9                ^   ?   & s   Z c   J   1 ~   e   L   3 t   [ t                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         t u    j   C   * w   N ^ _   F   - z   ! n                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              1 6                   t {     4 2 ;   ` b Y e & + 4 : ; = F   > H          }    j q q x v& & . .  0 0 0 28 =8 G: T: ; ; < '< )< h@ 6] j  h@ Uh@ OJ PJ QJ ^J mH	sH	 h@  h@ mH	sH	 h@ 6]mH	sH	P    d  L   2 H    7    k  
  >  9                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           * w    c   & s   R   1 ~   6                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               2 (
Px4 #\'*.25@9                ^    Z    k   ! f   	  i   O s   2    ' H                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            / |   c    d    ]    N   5 m   ) v   C                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         C    g    U   <   # p  
 W    K   2    f                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         f         m   T   ;   " o  	 / |   c   J                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            1 ~    e      L   3    9     m   9 : < =                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             = F G V ` a   H   / |   K   2	 	 	 	 -
 z
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               2 (
Px4 #\'*.25@9                ^  a s   Z   A   ( u   \   C t   [   B   ) v                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         v   Z   A  2  3    g t   [   B    >   % r                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         r   / |   c   J      1! ~! ! " e" " " L# # # 3$ $ $ % g% % &                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         & N& p& q& & & & & & & 6' ' ' ( j( ( ) 9) ) )  * m* * + T+ + + ;, v, ,                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         , - ]- - - D. . . +/ ?/ / |0 1 1 %2 r2 2 3 Y3 3 3 @4 Y4 4 4 @5 5 5 '6 t6                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         t6 6 7 [7 7 7 B8 8 8 9 O9 9 9 6: : : ; j; ; ; ; ; ; ; 2< <                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            2 (
Px4 #\'*.25@9                ^   )< 9< #= *= @ &@ $A 4A YB bB C C D E 	H H  H 'H xH ~H *M 3M M M Q Q R R US [S S T T U |U U W W 0X 9X Y Z x\ ~\ \ \ \ \ ` ` k  l l l s s /u Ju \w cw *y 5y | A}   ! '       e l މ    y   h@ OJ PJ QJ ^J mH	sH	 h@ 6] h@ OJ PJ QJ ^J  h@  h@ mH	sH	 h@ 6]mH	sH	N< < < 8= = = > l> > ? S? ? ? :@ @ @ A ]A A A DB B B +C xC C C CD D D                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         D *E kE E F RF F F 9G G G  H mH H H %I rI I J YJ J J @K K K 'L 4L L L M                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         M hM M N ON ]N N N DO O O +P xP P Q _Q Q Q FR R R -S zS S T aT qT T U XU                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         XU U U V lV V W SW W W :X X X !Y :Y Y Y !Z nZ Z [ U[ [ [ <\ }\ ~\                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        ~\ \ \ \ \ ] i] ] ^ ?^ ^ ^ &_ s_ _ ` Z` ` ` Aa a a (b ub b b                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              2 (
Px4 #\'*.25@9                ^ b Ac c c (d ud d e \e e e Cf f f *g wg g g Dh h h i li i j ?j j j &k sk                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         sk Bl l vm n Un n n <o o o #p Pp p p 7q q q q ;r r r "s os s s t Tt et t                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         t t )u vu u v v lv v w Sw w w :x x x !y gy y z Nz z z 5{ { { | i| | |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         | | } B} l} } } } !~ n~ ~  U   <      ۀ ( u D ނ                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            2 (
Px4 #\'*.25@9                ^   ނ x 	 V   =  ׅ $ q   J   1 ~ ˈ  e   L    j                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Q h   O   6  Ў  j   Q   , y Ƒ  `  ʒ  d   K                                                                                                   