Lady of the Trillium
    Trillium 05 - Lady of the Trillium by Marion Zimmer Bradley (v1.0)
     
    Chapter One
    The stone Tower of Noth stood desolate, surrounded by dying weeds. The little
    bit of water remaining in the moat was covered with scum, and the smell of death
    filled the air. The girl ran across the drawbridge, through the courtyard and
    the garden, into the chamber of the Archimage, only to see the old woman die and
    her body crumble to dust. As the girl stood there, stunned by the suddenness of
    it all, the entire Tower turned to dust around her and blew away, and the only
    thing left was the white cloak of the Archimage…
    Haramis, the White Lady, Archimage of Ruwenda, woke suddenly, feeling very old,
    especially in contrast to the young girl she had been in her dream. This was not
    particularly surprising; she was old, several ordinary lifetimes old by now, she
    thought ruefully. As Archimage, soul-bound to the land, her life span had been
    lengthened long past those of her two sisters. Though born at one birth, their
    destinies had separated long ago, and now she, the eldest of the triplet
    princesses, was the only one left.
    Kadiya, the second of the sisters, had been the first to leave. After the great
    battle with the invaders from Labornok and the evil sorcerer Orogastus, she had
    disappeared into her beloved swamps with her Oddling companion and her talisman,
    the Three-Lobed Burning Eye, which formed part of the great magical scepter the
    triplets had used to defeat Orogastus. For a time she and Haramis had
    communicated occasionally by scrying, but Kadiya had vanished many decades ago.
    By now, Haramis thought, she must be long dead.
    Anigel, the youngest, had married Prince Antar of Labornok, uniting their two
    kingdoms, and died peacefully of old age, surrounded by her children and
    grandchildren. The combined throne passed on through her descendants. Was it her
    grandchild or great-grandchild who held it now? Haramis couldn't remember; the
    years slipped by too fast. Maybe it was even a great-great-grandchild.
    Haramis, the eldest, had been chosen to replace the Arch-image Binah as guardian
    of the land. Ruwenda had prospered over the years, and Haramis loved the land as
    if it were her own child. In a way, it was.
    But now she was having strange dreams. This was the third night in a row she had
    relived Binah's death in her dreams and awakened in the morning too tired to get
    out of bed. Was this a warning that she was to die soon?
    Perhaps the time was nearing for a new guardian to take over. If her successor
    were chosen soon, Haramis might even have time to train her. Haramis would have
    appreciated some training when she had been chosen, but had been given none. She
    wanted to do better by her own successor. But who would her successor be?
    Binah had simply handed Haramis her cloak and died, and the Tower where she had
    lived and worked had crumbled to dust along with her body. Haramis, who had been
    until that moment heiress to the throne, had been trained since childhood to be
    Queen, not Archimage. She had found the sudden shift in her duties
    disconcerting, to say the least. This was not the legacy she wished to leave for
    her successor.
    Haramis dragged herself out of bed, ignoring aching joints and a general feeling
    of malaise. If she were still living in the Citadel of Ruwenda, where she had
    grown up, she would doubtless have felt much worse-the Citadel was a typical
    stone castle, impossible to heat. But the Tower where Haramis had lived since
    becoming Archimage was warm inside, even though the Tower was located near the
    Labornok/Ruwenda border at the top of Mount Brom and the season was winter.
    Orogastus had held the Tower before her, and he had furnished it with every
    luxury he could track down and steal or purchase. He had specialized in devices
    of the Vanished Ones. While a good many of these were dangerous weapons, some of
    the devices were quite practical and made daily life much more comfortable.
    Orogastus, unfortunately for him, had never quite grasped the distinction
    between the leftover technology of the Vanished Ones and true magic. He had
    depended so heavily on the former that Haramis and her sisters had been able to
    destroy him with the latter.
    To Haramis the difference between magic and ancient technology was so obvious,
    though difficult to articulate, that she still could not understand how
    Orogastus could have been so stupid, especially since he had possessed some
    magical abilities of his own.
    Haramis still winced when she recalled the glamour he had briefly cast over
    her-for a few weeks she had even fancied herself in love with him. But that
    seems to have worked against him, she remembered. He missed several
    opportunities to harm me, even after I made it clear I did not love him. It was
    as if he were convinced that he loved me and could not harm me, and I would
    necessarily love him in return and help him in his plans.
    She crossed to an ornately carved wooden armoire and took a silver bowl out of
    one of its drawers. Placing it on a table in the center of the room, she filled
    it half-full with clear water from a pitcher at her bedside, and bent over it.
    Water-scrying was practiced by several of the Oddling races who lived in the
    swamps surrounding the Citadel. The Oddlings were not humans; they were
    aboriginal descendants of the original inhabitants of the land. Some of the
    Oddling races were fairly human in appearance, while others looked like the
    stuff of nightmares, but generally they lived at peace with the humans.
    The Nyssomu were among the more human-looking Oddlings, and several of them had
    served at the Ruwendan court when Haramis was a child. Her best friend, Uzun, a
    Nyssomu and the Court Musician, had possessed quite a bit of magical ability in
    addition to his musical talents, and it was he who had taught Haramis to
    water-scry. It was a notoriously unreliable method of divination, and only
    slightly better as a method of communication, but Haramis discovered that when
    combined with her powers as Archimage, it was quite accurate. It was easier and
    more reliable, however, if done on an empty stomach.
    Now she cleared her mind as much as she could, although she found it impossible
    completely to banish her recent dream, and looked into and through the water.
    Almost at once she seemed to be flying through the air, as if on the back of one
    of the great lammergeiers that carried her at need, approaching a tower. She
    recognized it as the main tower of the Citadel, a comparatively recent addition
    built by humans (within the last five hundreds), as opposed to the main
    building, which was another survival from the time of the Vanished Ones.
    She landed lightly on the roof of the Tower and allowed her spirit body to sink
    through the trapdoor into the uppermost chamber. Now, in her vision, the room
    was empty. The last time Haramis had been there in reality this room had been
    filled with Labornoki soldiers trying to capture her and Uzun, and only the
    timely arrival of two lammergeiers to carry them away from the top of the Tower
    had enabled them to depart alive. Memories of that long-ago day returned as
    Haramis continued to backtrack her former escape route.
    The next floor down had been a dormitory for some of Citadel's soldiers. To the
    best of Haramis's recollection, the crazy idea of making the soldiers sleep
    seventeen flights of stairs up from anything else had been her grandfather's.
    Her father had been much more a scholar than a warrior and hadn't bothered to
    change the arrangement.
    But obviously someone had been sensible enough to scrap this custom before it
    became hallowed by tradition. Although the room still contained half a dozen
    cots and their associated clothing boxes, there were only two people in the
    former barracks, and they were children, a boy and girl who both seemed to be
    about twelve years old. They sat facing each other on the floor, in the center
    of a pool of sunlight coming through an open window.
    "I think it works by light," the boy was saying. He was slender, with dark thick
    hair in need of cutting. It fell across his face as he bent over the object they
    were studying, and he shoved it back absently. It fell back as soon as he
    removed his hand, but he ignored it.
    "It can't be just that," the girl objected. She had bright red hair, done in
    sloppy braids that fell to her waist. Haramis hadn't seen hair like that on
    anyone since her sister Kadiya, and from the look of her, this girl took just
    about as much care of her appearance as Kadiya had. Both children were dressed
    in clothing that was obviously handed down from older siblings, and neither
    seemed to feel any need to take any thought to keeping it clean. The wooden
    floor appeared not to have been swept in months, if not years, but the dust was
    disarranged in patterns that suggested that these children, or someone else,
    were in the habit of sprawling on the floor, heedless of dust and splinters. And
    the girl was even thinner than the boy. Doesn't anyone feed these children?
    Haramis wondered.
    "It doesn't work in the dark." The boy was still arguing his point.
    "Oh, I agree that it needs light in order to work, but if it were just light
    that activated it, all of the tunes except the bottom one would play at once."
    Haramis's vision-self crossed the room to see what the girl was holding. She
    recognized it at once; it had been one of her favorite toys when she was a
    child. It was a music box, surviving from the time of the Vanished Ones, a cube
    that played a different tune depending on which side one set it upon.
    "Look, Fiolon," the girl pointed out, holding the cube so that one edge touched
    the floor between them. "If it were just light, it should be playing at least
    one tune now-it's getting direct sunlight." She shifted it to lie flat, and a
    tune started. "See? It has to have one face flat on the floor or"-she lifted it
    straight up and the music continued unchanging-"parallel to the floor."
    "Horizontal, you mean," the boy said.
    "It's the same thing, if the floor is flat. Now look." She turned the box to one
    side, moving it slowly and carefully. "The tune stops when you tilt it more than
    two finger widths, and when the new side is horizontal there's a pause before
    the music starts again. And during that pause," she finished triumphantly, "I
    can feel something shifting in the cube. The music doesn't start again until
    whatever it is reaches the bottom." She shook the cube next to her ear. "There's
    some kind of liquid in here. I'd love to open this up and see what's inside and
    how it works."
    Fiolon reached out and grabbed the toy from her hand. "Don't you dare, Mikayla!
    This is the only one we've got, and I like it. If you break it, I won't marry
    you when we grow up."
    "I'd put it back together," Mikayla protested.
    "You don't know that you could put it back together," Fiolon pointed out with
    quiet practicality. "You don't know what the liquid is-it's too heavy to be
    water-and you'd certainly spill at least some if you opened this. And we don't
    have anything else that lets us know what the music of the Vanished Ones was
    like."
    Mikayla laughed. "You just don't want to risk destroying any source of music, I
    think your father must have been a musician."
    Fiolon shrugged. "We'll never know."
    Mikayla took the cube back and hefted it in one hand. "I think you're right
    about the liquid. This does feel too heavy to be water, and the whatever-it-is
    inside moves too slowly for it to be floating in water." She sighed. "I wish we
    could find more of these."
    "Me, too," Fiolon agreed. "Maybe then we'd get some more tunes."
    "And if we found a duplicate, I could take it apart and find out what's inside."
    "Why do you always want to know how things work?"
    Mikayla shrugged. "I just do. Why do you always want to write a song about
    everything?"
    Fiolon matched her shrug. "I just do."
    They looked at each other and burst out laughing.
    Haramis started to chuckle, and found herself back in her Tower looking at the
    bowl of water. Her breath had disturbed the surface, breaking the vision.
    Well, she thought, they certainly seem intelligent enough, but I have difficulty
    seeing her as Archimage. I'll have to find out more about her-and about him.
    From his remark about marriage, it sounds as though they might be betrothed, but
    it's certainly odd that he doesn't seem to know who his father is. And while
    their clothes are clearfy handed down, they were good clothes originally, and
    the children don't speak like servants.
    Haramis dressed quickly and went to eat breakfast. She had letters to write and
    messages to send.
    Information about the land was as accessible to Haramis as her heartbeat.
    Information about people was much more difficult to obtain. It took several
    weeks for Ayah, a Nyssomu servant at the palace, to receive the Archimage's
    message, get leave to visit her sister, and get far enough away from the Citadel
    so that a lammergeier could fetch her without being seen. Nobody in the royal
    family knew that Ayah's sister worked for the Archimage, and Haramis wanted to
    keep things that way. But finally a lammergeier arrived at the Tower with a
    well-wrapped-up Nyssomu on its back. Haramis went out to meet the bird and
    carried the little woman indoors herself. The main drawback to living where she
    did was that her Nyssomu servants could not safely go outside. Even after almost
    two hundreds, Haramis still recalled vividly the day her friend and companion
    Uzun had nearly frozen to death while they were searching for her Talisman. She
    had lost an entire day's travel backtracking to a lower altitude and thawing
    Uzun out, before sending him back to the lowlands and continuing alone. The
    Vispi were the only Oddlings that could survive in the mountains, and even they
    preferred to live in isolated small valleys warmed by hot springs.
    So Haramis carried a well-wrapped bundle into the Tower and turned her guest
    over to Enya, her visitor's sister, to be taken to her room and given some
    refreshment after her journey. What Haramis wanted to know had waited this long;
    it could wait a few more hours.
    When the three of them were gathered in Haramis's study, sipping from mugs of
    hot ladu-juice, Haramis asked Ayah about the children she had seen in her
    vision.
    "Princess Mikayla and Lord Fiolon?" the Oddling asked in surprise. She obviously
    wondered what interest Haramis had in the two children, but Haramis chose not to
    explain-at least not at the moment. She merely waited until the woman continued.
    "Mika-Princess Mikayla-is the sixth of the King's seven children. The King
    concentrates on the education of his heir; the Queen fusses over her 'baby'-who
    is now ten years old, and the other four are close together in age and tend to
    band together." The Oddling woman shook her head. "So nobody cares much what
    Mika does, and Fiolon's parents are dead-or at least his mother is. If they
    didn't have each other, she would be a very lonely child, and so, I suspect,
    would he."
    Haramis considered that. "I always had Uzun for my best friend," she said,
    smiling fondly at a polished wood harp with a bone inlay at the top of its post
    that stood next to her chair. She ran a hand along its back as if stroking a
    household pet. "But still, I can't imagine what childhood would have been like
    without my sisters. They were always there-whether I wanted them to be or not."
    She pulled her thoughts back to the present. "So how does Fiolon fit in? Exactly
    who is he?"
    Ayah continued her report. "Lord Fiolon of Var. His mother was the youngest
    sister of the King of Var-our Queen is the middle child. Fiolon's mother died
    when he was born, but it was over six years before our Queen persuaded the King
    to allow her to foster her late sister's child."
    "And Fiolon's father?" Haramis had been wondering about that point ever since
    she had heard the children's conversation.
    Ayah shrugged. "Nobody knows. His mother wasn't married."
    Haramis raised her eyebrows. "The sister of the King of Var had a baby and
    nobody has any idea who fathered it? Given the lack of privacy in any palace
    I've ever seen, that seems incredible. Surely somebody must at least suspect who
    her lover was."
    "Gossip has it that she died claiming that one of the Lords of the Air fathered
    her child."
    Haramis raised her eyebrows. "I had never heard that the Lords of the Air took
    corporeal form-let alone fathered children."
    Ayah sighed. "She was dying, Lady, and probably delirious. But I agree-it is odd
    that nobody knows who fathered him. Very odd."
    Haramis shrugged. "I doubt that it matters. Every large family has surplus
    children. Are he and Mikayla betrothed?"
    Ayah shook her head. "There's some talk of it-Mikayla falls into your 'surplus'
    category as well, as much as any princess can -but there's no formal contract. I
    think it might well be a good thing; they're very fond of each other."
    "That's a pity," Haramis said. "Since Mikayla is to be the next Archimage,
    she'll have to give him up."
    Ayah's jaw dropped. "Mika? The Archimage?" She hesitated a long moment before
    continuing. "White Lady, I really don't think she'll like that."
    "It doesn't matter whether she likes it or not," Haramis said calmly. "One does
    not volunteer for this life. It is her destiny, as it was mine."
    Chapter Two
    Haramis felt she could delay no longer. She did not want to think of her
    successor left as she herself had been-suddenly plunged into being the Archimage
    of Ruwenda without a clue as to what that might entail. And so she must, cruel
    and premature as it might seem to her (and obviously to Ayah), begin to educate
    Mikayla for the office she would hold one day.
    Ayah remained for several days at the Tower, with Enya to keep her company,
    while Haramis made her preparations for the journey to fetch her successor. She
    could, of course, simply have summoned a few of the great lammergeiers to carry
    her to the Citadel and bring her and Mikayla back to the Tower. But she wanted
    Mikayla to see in detail the land she would be bound to, and so, on the day she
    sent Ayah off by lammergeier, she mounted one fronial and loaded supplies and
    camping gear on a second and set out for the Citadel to the south where her
    sister Anigel had lived and died.
    The first few days of travel were in the mountains. It was very cold, even
    though the weather was mild for winter and no new snow fell. (Haramis felt that
    she was suffering quite enough traveling through the snow that was already there
    without permitting additional snow to fall.) Despite a well-lined sleep sack,
    she ached in every joint when she woke in the mornings. But by the end of the
    fifth day she was out of the snow and watching the sun sink red and swollen over
    the marshes to her west.
    Most of the way now she traveled by long-unused secret paths through the marshes
    of Ruwenda. Once she had known every step of these paths as well as the shelves
    of her own library. From the aching of her muscles, if nothing else, it was
    evident to her that she had indeed dwelt for far too long in retirement within
    the walls of her own comfortable Tower. It was true that while all was well with
    the land there was no need for her to leave the Tower, but still, she thought,
    she should get out more. How many years had it been since she had seen the land
    other than in vision trances? Despite her aching body, it was good to be out and
    about.
    In physical appearance, she had put on the semblance of an ordinary woman, no
    longer young, although still appearing hale and fit despite her snow-white hair.
    This was the appearance she had always used when traveling about the land, even
    when she had still been a young girl. It ensured that she would be treated with
    a certain amount of respect, but not with the superstitious awe that the
    recognized presence of the Archimage would evoke. But by the end of each day,
    she wondered whether this semblance of fitness were not as much a lie as
    anything that would have indicated her more Arcane powers-or her true age.
    She could, she reminded herself again, have justified summoning one of the
    lammergeiers who served her, and she was frequently tempted, especially late in
    the afternoons, to emphasize the urgency of her mission in that way.
    But it seemed to her that setting all Ruwenda astir by landing in the courtyard
    of her however-many-times-great-niece's home in such a fashion would give the
    girl-and possibly even her parents, who ought to know better-an entirely
    erroneous idea of what the duties and difficulties of being Archimage were, as
    well as an essentially flawed idea of the proper uses of magical power. There
    was nothing at all magical about the fronials; Orogastus had kept a stable of
    them (since he could not summon the lammergeiers, fronials were his only means
    of transport to and from the Tower), and Haramis had simply continued his
    breeding program.
    Orogastus, always flamboyant, would almost certainly have arrived on this errand
    by lammergeier if he could have. But that was not Haramis's way.
    So she went on, unattended, frequently leading the fronials when low-hanging
    vegetation made riding impossible, with nothing outwardly magical about her
    except her white cloak and staff. Her Talisman, the Three-Winged Circle, worn on
    a chain about her neck, was hidden by her clothing. She wore her stoutest boots,
    bespelled somewhat against the rain and fog of this season, and against their
    wearer's being lost on the confusing roads -not that the Archimage should have
    the slightest need of the last spell, but she had dabbled in spell casting since
    childhood, and she liked to keep in practice.
    This journey was a good time to refresh her own memories of the roads and
    pathways of Ruwenda, for she had not traveled them afoot for many a year. So,
    though she could have chosen any kind of entourage she wished, or any kind of
    real or magical conveyance, she forbore magic for this journey, and traveled on
    foot and by fronial. But she hoped that in spite of this, her great-great-niece
    would sense some magical purpose in her journey.
    It would be a good start to her training if the girl turned out to have some
    natural magical ability. From what little Haramis had seen of her, Mikayla
    seemed more likely to try to analyze exactly what made a spell work rather than
    work to learn the feel of a spell, but she had been the girl in Haramis's vision
    of her successor, so obviously it was ordained. She did not think it possible
    that Fiolon, being both male and from Var, could possibly be her intended
    successor.
    Her leisurely journey through the swamps took another four days and nights,
    during which time Haramis renewed her acquaintance with more of the land of
    Ruwenda-mostly in the form of mud-than she really cared to. She had dwelt so
    long among the snowy mountains that she had forgotten just what mud was like.
    Snow could be brushed off, and any little bit that might be left would evaporate
    soon after she got indoors again. Mud stuck to her, dried on her skin, and
    itched. It was a relief when her path joined the Great Causeway and she
    exchanged the muddy trails for a paved road.
    Now that the road was easier, and she no longer needed to watch every step she
    took, she was free to look around her. Although winter was always rainy in the
    vicinity of the Citadel, today was one of the rare days of sun and mild
    temperatures, treasured as a break in the dreariness of the season. Birds
    chirped in the trees that lined the Causeway. When she reached the meadow that
    covered Citadel Knoll, she saw that even in midwinter, the black trillium
    flowers were blooming everywhere. She chuckled aloud. When she had been a child,
    the Black Trillium had been a rare and magical thing, so rare that there was
    only one plant in existence, in the care of the Archimage. But after Haramis and
    her sisters defeated Orogastus, the flowers had sprung up magically all over the
    knoll. Now they were as common as weeds-and probably, thought Haramis with wry
    amusement, as little regarded.
    It was late morning when she arrived at the Citadel, where she was greeted by
    the King with surprise so great it amounted to stupefaction.
    "Lady Archimage, you honor us greatly," the King said, looking somewhat nervous.
    "How may we serve you?"
    The Queen, on the other hand, seemed to regard Haramis's arrival thus unheralded
    and unattended as no more than the eccentricity of an old woman, and made
    allowances for it. "You must be exhausted, Lady!" The housekeeper came hurrying
    up in response to the Queen's glance in her direction. "Let the servants take
    your things to the guest chamber and care for your beasts, while you rest from
    your journey."
    Ten days of coping with the winter weather and the whims of two slightly
    crotchety fronials (they didn't mind the mountains much, but they hated the
    swamps) had left Haramis short not only of breath but of temper.
    "You can skip all the ceremony," she said shortly. "My business is not with
    either of you, but with Mikayla."
    "Mikayla?" The King looked blank.
    "Your daughter Mikayla," Haramis said through gritted teeth. She had never
    suffered fools gladly, and she had spent so much of her time alone for so many
    years that she was badly out of practice in court manners. Furthermore, as
    Archimage, she didn't have to care what people thought of her. "Sixth of your
    seven children. You do remember her, don't you?"
    The King managed a nervous chuckle. "Yes, of course I remember her. But she's
    just a little girl. What do you want with her?"
    Fortunately for what remained of Haramis's temper, the Queen was of a more
    practical frame of mind. Briefly Haramis was reminded of her own parents, the
    scholarly and extremely absentminded King Krain and the capable and gentle Queen
    Kalanthe. The Queen sent the housekeeper to be sure that the guest chamber was
    made ready and the fire lit in it immediately, that servants brought in
    Haramis's baggage, and that the two fronials were cared for. She dispatched
    Ayah, who, to Haramis's complete lack of surprise, had been hovering behind the
    housekeeper, with orders to find the Princess Mikayla and bring her to the small
    parlor immediately. She then led Haramis to the parlor, seated her in the most
    comfortable chair, and sent for refreshments. "Dinner will be served soon," she
    explained, "but perhaps a bit of dried fruit and cheese would be acceptable?"
    Haramis sat straight in the chair, being careful not to let her weariness show.
    Outside, in the bright sun, she had felt well, but indoors it was gloomy and
    damp, in spite of the fire. She looked at the King, who had trailed after them
    and was now standing uncertainly near the doorway. She could tell that he would
    rather have had time to prepare Mikayla for a meeting with her elderly
    kinswoman. From what little she had seen of Mikayla, she suspected that the
    Queen felt the same, but she hid it better than her husband. Or perhaps, Haramis
    thought, the King really was trying to call Mikayla to mind. If he thought she
    was a little girl, he obviously hadn't paid much attention to her lately.
    Haramis had the feeling that today was going to be quite a shock to him.
    The food arrived, and Haramis ate politely, restraining her impatience. Ayah
    would find Mikayla as quickly as anyone could, and it would be unwise to show
    too much impatience.
    But when Ayah returned, she was alone.
    "Where is my daughter?" the Queen demanded.
    Ayah looked unhappy. "Not in the Citadel, Your Majesty. I'm very much afraid
    that she's gone off with Lord Fiolon on one of their exploring trips again."
    The Queen sank into a chair and pinched the bridge of her nose as if a sudden
    headache had struck her. Unwelcome as this news undoubtedly was to her, Haramis
    had the distinct impression that it was not a complete surprise. Indeed, the
    Queen's only audible comment was a soft, "Why today?"
    The King, however, did not seem to understand a situation about which even
    Haramis could make a good guess. Of course, Haramis's sister Kadiya had been in
    the habit of disappearing into the swamps for weeks on end, accompanied only by
    the Nyssomu hunter Jagun, her favorite companion, so Haramis had some
    familiarity with this sort of behavior. Princess Kadiya had spent enough time
    among the Nyssomu to earn the mire-name "Farseer" and to be inducted as an
    honorary member of the Nyssomu tribe.
    "Exploring trips?" he blustered. "Explain yourself, woman! Are you saying that
    my daughter is running around the swamps alone?"
    "No, Majesty," Ayah said hastily, "I'm sure she's not alone. She and Lord Fiolon
    have many friends in the Nyssomu village just west of the Knoll, so I'm sure
    they went with a guide, at the very least."
    The King seemed about to explode; men, Haramis thought, always asked about
    nonessentials. But Haramis chose that moment to take a hand.
    "Where would they have gone?" she asked calmly.
    "I heard them talking last month about some ancient ruins up the River Golobar,"
    Ayah said, "but they were agreeing that the river level wasn't high enough to
    take a boat up that far. Of course," she added diffidently, "it has rained quite
    a bit since then."
    Haramis knew the ruins in question, although she had never been there in person.
    They lay where the Blackmire met the Greenmire, up the River Golobar almost
    halfway between its source and the point where it flowed into the Lower Mutar
    River, about a day's journey west of the Citadel. Allow a day to get to the
    Golobar, and probably at least a week, under ideal conditions to get to the
    ruins, assuming, of course…
    "The Skritek!" Haramis said suddenly. "She does know that there is a large
    concentration of Skritek in that area, does she not?"
    "What?" the King roared, almost drowning out the Queen's gasp of horror.
    "Don't you know anything about your realm?" Haramis snapped at him. "It's
    certainly clear that you know next to nothing about your family."
    "Don't worry, Mama; the Skritek won't hurt Mika," a child's voice said
    reassuringly from the doorway. "She talks to them and they leave her alone."
    Haramis was inclined to doubt the truth of that statement.
    Certainly she could turn away ravening Skritek with a command, but she was the
    Archimage.
    The Skritek, commonly called Drowners, were known for their habit of concealing
    themselves underwater to lie in wait for their prey, which included all other
    Oddlings (such as the Nyssomu) and large animals, then drag it down to be
    drowned before they ate it. Their hunting habits out of the water were even
    worse; on land they hunted in packs. Haramis had even seen them attack humans;
    in fact, a pack of Skritek had wiped out part of King Voltrik's army. Since King
    Voltrik of Labornok had invaded Ruwenda, killed her parents, and was trying to
    kill her and her sisters, Haramis had managed to restrain her tears at the time.
    And those were the adults. In some ways, the younger ones were even worse.
    Skritek laid eggs and abandoned them. Skritek were the only Oddlings to have a
    true larval stage, which fended for itself as best it could-which was fairly
    well-until it spun a cocoon, changed, and emerged as a small, ravenous adult.
    Haramis had the uneasy feeling that one of the groves of dead trees that the
    Skriteks used for their metamorphosis was along the children's proposed route.
    She resolved to check on this as soon as she had a chance.
    But right now, the Queen was proudly introducing her "baby" -the ten-year-old
    Prince Egon. He bowed properly over Haramis's hand, to her well-concealed
    amusement. This one was a little charmer, all right. He had masses of gold curly
    hair and big innocent-looking blue eyes-in fact he looked quite a lot like
    Anigel. Must be a throwback, Haramis thought. I hope he's got brains, although
    with those looks he probably could survive without them.
    "So your sister talks to Skritek, does she?" Haramis asked. "What does she say
    to them?"
    "She says they are forbidden to wage war against humans."
    Haramis was surprised. This was true, and enforcing this prohibition was one of
    the Archimage's duties. But how would Mikayla know of this-and under what
    circumstances had she been discussing it with any of the Skritek? She did not
    think the Skritek took the prohibition very seriously. But if Mikayla thought
    otherwise-
    Obviously, it was important for Haramis to make Mikayla's acquaintance as soon
    as possible.
    Chapter Three
    The river had been just deep enough for the flat-bottomed boats used by the
    Nyssomu to reach the ruins. Mikayla, Fiolon, and their Nyssomu guides Quasi and
    Traneo had spent several days swapping places back and forth in the boats,
    taking turns poling them through the shallows and rowing upstream when the water
    was deep enough. It was hard work, but they kept at it, from sunrise to sunset
    each day.
    When it was too dark to see where they were going, they pulled the boats ashore,
    ate a carefully rationed portion of the dried meat they had brought along for
    the journey, and slept in one of the boats, with the other one inverted and tied
    securely on top of the first. This meant that they didn't have to stand watch at
    night. The Skritek, the only predator large enough to rip apart the boats,
    wouldn't bother humans without provocation, and as long as Quasi and Traneo
    slept between Mikayla and Fiolon, their scent would not be noticeable to a
    passing Skritek. In fact, by the time they reached Skritek territory, they all
    smelled more of the swamp than of anything else.
    They had spent almost two days traveling through Skritek territory, when traces
    of the ruins they were searching for appeared at the edge of the river.
    Fiolon pointed excitedly. "Look, there was a village here once. Maybe in these
    ruins we can find more music boxes-or something equally interesting."
    "I don't believe there could be anything else nearly as interesting," Mikayla
    teased. "Not to you, anyhow."
    "Princess," ventured one of their Oddling guides, the little Nyssomu named
    Quasi, "you don't want to go into these ruins. The ones farther upriver are more
    interesting."
    Mikayla regarded him suspiciously. "You want us to travel farther upriver
    through Skritek territory and run a greater risk of encountering them? What's
    wrong with these ruins?"
    "They look fine to me," Fiolon protested, "and I want to find out more about the
    Vanished Ones."
    "And I really want to find some more of those music boxes," Mikayla added, "and
    see how they work."
    Traneo, seemingly frightened by something, ventured to say, "The King would be
    very angry if anything happened you, my lord; he charged me straightly to make
    certain that no harm befell either you or the Princess."
    "That's nonsense," Fiolon said. "The King doesn't care what I do. I don't think
    the King even knows we're here."
    Mikayla was so appalled by the air of utter conviction with which Fiolon spoke,
    and the probable truth behind it, that for a moment she could find nothing to
    say. Then she turned back to Quasi and said, "But you still haven't said why
    these ruins might be dangerous."
    "Well," Quasi said nervously, rolling his eyes, "they're still alive."
    "Alive?" Fiolon said. "The ruins? Are you telling us that the buildings were-and
    still are-alive? I've never heard that even the Vanished Ones could make
    buildings live."
    "If anyone goes into them," Quasi said in quavering tones, "voices come out of
    the ground and speak in an unknown language."
    "Suppose there are still some devices of the Vanished Ones working in there!"
    Mikayla said excitedly. "We've got to go in!"
    "Not now!" Traneo said urgently. "It's almost nightfall. Please, Princess, don't
    do anything hasty. Sleep on it-do not enter until morning-if enter you must."
    "All right, then, let's find a safe place to make camp," Mikayla said. "And-I
    don't know about you, but I'm getting hungry. Aren't you?"
    Fiolon said, with quiet literalness, "I've been hungry for the best part of
    three days. You were the one who insisted we should ration our supplies."
    "I still think it's a good idea," Mikayla said, "because if we run out of food
    we will have to go home. And I don't want to do that -not yet anyway."
    "So what do you think we ought to do?" demanded Fiolon.
    "I think we should let Quasi and Traneo find a proper campsite."
    Fiolon turned inquiringly to Quasi, who said quickly, "We do not have much time
    before dark, my lord; but I will do my best."
    They continued upriver for a bit, then Traneo signaled to send the boats to
    shore on a little promontory, covered with round smooth stones. "We can try
    this, Lord Fiolon. At least here, no Skriteks could hide in the long grass."
    "They certainly couldn't," Mikayla agreed. "There's not enough grass here to
    hide anything larger than a meadow-funt." She jumped out of the boat to search
    for dried grass to use as kindling for a fire. But the second she set foot on
    the ground she froze.
    "Mika?" Fiolon, still in the boat, looked inquiringly at her. "What's wrong?"
    "Something," Mikayla said, "but I don't know exactly what it is. Something feels
    wrong, something in the ground."
    Traneo had already climbed from the boat and was prowling about, deciding
    exactly where to set up camp. Mikayla followed him, moving slowly and trying to
    pinpoint the source of her uneasiness.
    She came to the patch of smooth stones and tripped over one. To her astonishment
    it did not feel hard to her feet but somehow soft and leathery. While she stood
    looking at it, it began to rock slowly back and forth. Surely she had not kicked
    it that hard, had she? While she still stood startled, looking at it, it split
    with an odd tearing sound, and from the widening crack, an ugly green snout
    appeared, topped by two black and bulging circles.
    Mikayla had never before seen a Skritek in the larval stage, but she needed no
    one to tell her that she saw one now. Its ugly mouth opened to reveal two rows
    of appallingly long and sharp teeth, although it lacked the tusks of an adult,
    and was only a seventh of the size of a Skritek fully grown.
    She was entirely unprepared for the quickness with which the ugly thing moved.
    Although it was not more than a foot high, it seemed almost to grow larger as
    she looked at it. It crawled with appalling haste in their direction, seized
    Traneo between its claws, and started dragging him toward the water. To her
    horror it began to devour the Nyssomu without even killing him first. Traneo
    shrieked.
    Mikayla did not believe the creature could see yet-a leathery white film still
    covered part of the bulging eyes-but even while she stood, half-frozen in shock,
    it finished biting the Oddling's head off. Traneo's scream was cut off in
    midhowl, and only a splash showed where the Nyssomu had been dragged under by
    the horrid Skritek hatchling.
    Mikayla jumped backward, tripped over a rock, and measured her length in the
    sand. Terror surged through her; she had faced death before while hunting, but
    never in such an ugly form. She tried to scramble hastily to her feet, but
    another of the eggs wriggled under her foot, throwing her to the ground before
    another emerging Skritek larva. She had landed flat on her back and the breath
    had been knocked out of her, so for the moment she lay helpless in the sand. The
    small Skritek had actually opened its mouth when a stone came flying from behind
    her and struck the Skritek on its extended snout. It staggered back and fell
    sideways.
    Sobbing with relief, Mikayla scrambled to her feet, and fell against Fiolon, who
    with more roughness than gallantry dragged her into a boat and pulled away from
    the shore. In midstream, Mikayla recovered a little of her self-possession. She
    was still crying for Traneo-nobody should have died like that, literally being
    eaten alive-but at least she was no longer hysterical, and she was able to
    release her grip on Fiolon's arm, which made it much easier for him to control
    the boat.
    "I take it that-that thing was a Skritek, and those round things like stones
    were Skritek eggs," Fiolon said.
    Quasi, in the boat behind them, holding on to their stern, grimly assured them
    that this was indeed the case. Mikayla shuddered and looked at the shore.
    "I can cope with the adult Skritek, but not with those things! I like them even
    less now I have seen them at such close range," she remarked. "That's definitely
    as close as I ever care to get to one. If that was your stone, Fiolon, thanks; I
    think you saved my life. What should we do now?"
    Fiolon said in a shaky voice, "I think we should go back to the ruins. I'd
    rather have strange voices than hatching Skritek."
    "I agree," Mikayla said. "Look at those eggs!" Onshore, other eggs were rocking
    and splitting asunder; as each emerging hatchling lurched toward the rest one of
    its new-hatched fellows fell upon it, gnashing the dreadful teeth, and tore it
    to bits. Soon the entire shore was a mass of tearing, clawing, and rending
    hatchlings, strewn and smeared with their ugly greenish-black blood. The
    remaining party in the stream turned away their eyes in disgust as the boats
    slipped rapidly downriver.
    For a few moments all was silent in the boats; Fiolon stood in the bow, steering
    between the darkening shores, while Quasi still held the boats together.
    Mikayla, still shivering a bit, moved to help Quasi. She had, of course, seen
    the famous Drowners before, but with the few she had met, she had always been
    able to make herself understood. Creatures she could not communicate and reason
    with were quite another story!
    Mikayla and Fiolon both woke up with the dawn, ready to go explore the ruins.
    Quasi wasn't enthusiastic at all, but since his choices were to stay behind
    alone or accompany the children, he went with them, grumbling all the way.
    They picked their way carefully along the overgrown path to the ruins, watching
    carefully for any stonelike eggs, but finding none.
    "I guess their nesting site was upstream, and not here," Fiolon commented idly.
    "We hope," Quasi said darkly.
    "I don't feel any danger here," Mikayla remarked. "Quasi, you said that folk
    coming in here heard voices-but are there any stories of any of the Folk being
    harmed here?"
    "Most people, Princess, have sense enough to run when they hear strange voices,"
    Quasi said tartly.
    "In other words," Mikayla translated, "no. Nobody has ever been harmed here."
    "That we know of." Quasi did not sound happy.
    "We'll just keep an eye out for skeletons, then," Mikayla said, feeling much
    more cheerful in spite of the Oddling's dire warnings.
    "Look!" Fiolon said, so suddenly that for a moment Mikayla thought he had indeed
    found a skeleton. "That building ahead- it looks intact!" Both children rushed
    forward, Quasi scurrying unhappily after them.
    The building was indeed intact, and as they crossed the threshold the voices
    Quasi had mentioned started.
    "They don't sound threatening," Mikayla remarked, stopping to listen.
    Fiolon was listening intently. "I think that they're saying the same thing in
    different languages-some sort of welcome or announcement, perhaps. Listen to the
    cadences; do you hear how similar they are?"
    Mikayla listened until the voices fell silent, but shook her head. "I'm afraid I
    haven't your ear, Fiolon, but I'm sure you're right. Come, Master Musician,
    let's see if we can find you another music box." She hooked a hand around his
    elbow and dragged him farther into the building.
    The building was stone, made up of large rooms, with large latticework windows
    that had let in lots of daylight. Even now, with vines twining through the
    lattices, it was still light enough that they did not need torches.
    "I wonder if this was a school," Mikayla said as they passed through a room full
    of benches and tables.
    "Maybe it was a theater." Fiolon had preceded her into the next room. "Look how
    the benches are on risers around the stage."
    "Yes," Mikayla said, "this does look like a picture of a theater I saw in a book
    at home. But couldn't a school have its own theater?"
    "It would have to be a very rich school," Fiolon pointed out.
    "Maybe, compared to us, the Vanished Ones were rich," Mikayla said. "Even some
    of what must have been small trinkets to them are beyond price for us." She
    poked her head into a smaller room behind the stage. "I think this is some kind
    of storeroom, but it's dark. Do you have a torch?"
    Quasi reluctantly produced a torch and tinderbox, while grumbling that perhaps
    some things weren't meant to see the light.
    Mikayla ignored the grumbling, but thanked him as she took the torch from his
    hand. Together she and Fiolon entered the room and gasped in astonishment. The
    room was full of racks and shelves and cupboards. Fiolon went back into the
    theater room to get a second torch from Quasi while Mikayla began to examine the
    shelves. The first one was full of face masks, stylized, but definitely human
    faces in shape and color. They had holes for eyes so that the wearer could look
    through them, and a smaller hole as part of the mouth, obviously to breathe and
    speak through. Next to the shelf was a rack of costumes, but when Mikayla tried
    to take one off its peg, it fell to pieces in her hand. She gulped in dismay.
    "What did I do?"
    Fiolon lit his torch from hers and fingered through the fragments on the floor.
    They crumbled still further at his touch. "You didn't do anything, Mika," he
    reassured her. "This is some kind of silk, and silk rots as it ages. Anything
    that touches it would make it fall apart."
    "Oh, good," Mikayla said. "I'd hate to think I was wantonly destroying valuable
    history."
    Fio shrugged. "You can't touch this stuff without destroying it. I'm going to
    check the cupboards. If there are music boxes in this room, they'd have to be in
    one of them."
    "Or we'd be hearing them now," Mikayla agreed. "I'll take a quick look at the
    rest of the racks, and then I'll start on the other end of the cupboards and we
    can meet in the middle."
    Fiolon grunted in acknowledgment, already opening cupboards in a methodical
    fashion. Mikayla passed the rest of the costumes, being careful not to brush
    against them, and then came to a rack full of silver spheres about the diameter
    of her thumbnail. Each sphere had a loop set on the top of it, and they hung
    from different-colored ribbons, made of some sort of material Mikayla had never
    seen before. Judging from the length of the ribbon, they were intended to be
    some sort of pendant, and they seemed to come in paired sets. Mikayla touched
    one gently with a fingertip and it chimed softly as it swung back and forth.
    Soft as the sound was, it caught Fiolon's attention. "What have you got there?"
    he asked, joining her.
    "I don't know," Mikayla said, "but they're pretty, aren't they?"
    Fiolon was already testing for pitch up and down the line. "The different colors
    are different tones," he said absently.
    "I like this one." Mikayla picked up one of the pair with green ribbons and put
    it around her neck. "Here," she said, dropping its mate over Fiolon's head, "at
    least we've found something musical." She ran a finger over the ribbon around
    her neck. "And whatever this ribbon is made of, it's a lot stronger than silk."
    She moved to the far end of the cupboards. "I'll start on my share of the
    cupboards now."
    Fiolon shook the chiming ball next to each ear, then tucked it into the front of
    his tunic, before returning to the cupboards. After he explored a few more,
    there was a cacophony of sound as he opened one. "Look, Mika!" he shouted.
    Mika laughed. "I don't have to look, I can hear. They certainly sound strange
    all playing at once, don't they? How many are there?"
    "Seven," Fiolon replied, stuffing several into his belt pouch. Mikayla joined
    him and put the remainder into her own pouch. Silence fell as they were removed
    from the light.
    "Can we go now?" Quasi's voice came from outside. "Please?"
    Mikayla and Fiolon exchanged long-suffering glances. "Well," Fiolon admitted, "I
    guess we can. I'm not sure, Mika, but I think we've even got a duplicate here."
    "And we don't know how many of those wretched larval Skritek survived and if
    they're likely to come downriver," Mikayla admitted. "We can always come back
    when it's not their hatching season."
    "Good," Quasi said in heartfelt tones. "Let's get out of here- I'd like to get
    home in one piece!"
    Mikayla tucked her little sphere down the front of her tunic so it wouldn't
    catch on things on the path back to the boats, and they put out the torches and
    returned to the river.
    Quasi surveyed the boats sadly. "We'd better leave one here," he said. "We can
    all fit in one, and we'll get home much more swiftly if we're not trying to
    manage two boats among the three of us." The children agreed, and they quickly
    transferred their remaining supplies to one boat. They pulled the other one high
    up on the shore and turned it upside down.
    "We can retrieve it next time we come here," Mikayla said.
    Quasi snorted, and pushed them off from the shore.
    The river carried them quickly downstream, and soon they were approaching the
    point where the Golobar emptied into the Lower Mutar River. Mikayla squinted,
    trying to get a better look at the water ahead. "The current looks much faster
    than it was when we came up it," she remarked intently.
    Quasi looked up and gasped. "Stay low in the boat and hold on tightly," he
    ordered, but as the children moved quickly to obey him, the boat entered the
    Lower Mutar River and was flipped over like a child's toy boat in a strong
    breeze.
    Chapter Four
    Fortunatefy the boat had been almost to the opposite bank of the Lower Mutar
    when it capsized, and the current carried its three occupants in that direction.
    Fiolon found his footing fairly quickly, grabbed Quasi, and shoved him up onto
    the bank.
    Mikayla, however, had come up under one of their blankets, which was floating on
    the surface. Her first attempt to breathe got her a mouthful of blanket, so she
    quickly spat it out, ducked back under the water, and punched upward with both
    fists as she stood up. This left her standing in a pocket of air defined by her
    hands and her head. Walking carefully backward and keeping her hands up in front
    of her, she kept the airspace intact until she came out from under the blanket
    to find Fiolon staring at her.
    "That looked really strange," he said. "For a moment there I was afraid you were
    going to drown."
    "No," Mikayla said, "but it felt as if I were going to inhale that blanket."
    Together they dragged the blanket out of the water and spread it over a branch
    to dry, knowing they'd need it when night came.
    "Look at the bright side," Mikayla said, wringing water out of her dripping
    braids. "At least we're out of Skritek territory."
    "And not all that far from home," Fiolon added. "Quasi, can you bespeak your
    village?" Some of the Oddlings could speak mind to mind over short distances,
    and Quasi was quite talented at it.
    But Quasi was staring dumbstruck at the sky. The children followed his gaze and
    saw two enormous birds descending toward them.
    They were at least three times as large as any bird Mikayla had ever seen in her
    life, but as they came closer she realized that they were even bigger than she
    had thought at first. They had white bodies which were almost the size of a
    fronial's and wings banded black and white, but their necks and heads had no
    feathers on them and were about the same color as Mikayla's skin. Their eyes
    were black and had a look of intelligence Mikayla had never seen in a bird
    before. Their beaks were dark brown and had a hole in each side near the top of
    the beak.
    Within seconds the birds had dropped from the sky to land beside the bedraggled
    wanderers. There was a strange woman sitting on the back of one of the birds.
    Both children stared in astonishment. "I didn't know that birds could carry
    people," Mikayla said to Fiolon.
    Fiolon didn't answer her; he just sat and stared.
    The lady, however, seemed impatient. "Mikayla," she said, reaching down to grab
    the girl by the arm, "sit here in front of me." She half hauled the girl into
    position. "Fiolon," she added, pointing to the second bird, "climb aboard."
    Fiolon moved slowly to do as he was told, staring dubiously at the great bird
    and dragging Quasi with him. The Oddling hesitated until the lady nodded to him,
    then took his seat at the very back of the bird's neck.
    The lady spoke to the lammergeiers and they flew. Mikayla would have thought she
    was dreaming, but the pain in her arm where the lady had wrenched it when she
    hauled her onto the bird, and the extremely unpleasant sensation of wet clothing
    freezing on her body as they flew, convinced her that she was awake and, at
    least for the minute, alive.
    Within an hour they were at the Tower-the same distance that Haramis had
    traversed so laboriously on her fronials.
    Mikayla noticed when the bird they were riding began to lose altitude and the
    air grew slightly thicker and warmer, although "warmer" was certainly a relative
    term. She raised her head slightly from where she had pressed her face into the
    bird's feathers to protect it from the stinging wind and looked over the bird's
    shoulder. The bird's path slanted down toward a white Tower, set into a ledge in
    the mountain. Given the snow surrounding it, it might have been invisible had it
    not been liberally decorated with black trim around all the windows and black
    crenellations around the upper level. There was a balcony large enough for the
    lammergeiers to land on, and that appeared to be their destination.
    The birds landed, furling their wings, and Mikayla, freed from the lady's grip,
    slid to the pavement. By now her clothing had frozen; it crackled as she moved.
    She turned to see if Fiolon was all right.
    Fiolon was also on the pavement, holding Quasi's unconscious body, completely
    ignoring the birds that were taking flight around them. "Quasi!" he said
    urgently, shaking the little Oddling. "Wake up!"
    The lady walked stiffly over to them and reached down awkwardly to touch Quasi's
    forehead briefly. "He can't hear you," she said briskly. "Bring him, and follow
    me." She turned and walked through a doorway into the Tower without even looking
    back.
    Mikayla helped Fiolon lift Quasi's body. She was dismayed by how cold and
    unresponsive it was as she and Fiolon, both stiff with cold and hampered by
    frozen clothing, struggled to maneuver it through the doorway. Quasi didn't even
    flinch when they inadvertently banged him into the door frame.
    When they got inside, they found the lady standing at the end of the hall,
    staring down the stairs. There was the sound of several sets of light footsteps
    rushing up toward her, followed by the arrival of five servants: three Nyssomu
    and two Vispi. Mikayla had never seen a Vispi before, but she recognized them at
    once from descriptions in the books she and Fiolon had read.
    The Vispi were more human looking than the Nyssomu, taller, with narrower faces,
    and what looked to Mikayla like normal noses and mouths with small even teeth.
    Like the Nyssomu, they had larger eyes than humans did, but green instead of
    gold. They had silver-white hair and pointed ears, three fingers on each hand
    and fingernails that were virtually claws.
    "Welcome back, Lady Haramis," the Nyssomu woman said respectfully.
    "Thank you," Haramis said briefly. She indicated Quasi's limp form and pointed
    to the two Nyssomu men. "You and you, take this and thaw him out. You," she said
    to the Vispi woman, indicating Mikayla, "take the girl and get her cleaned up
    and dressed." To the Vispi man, she added, "You take the boy." As they were
    relieved of Quasi's body and towed off up another staircase, Mikayla heard
    Haramis add, "Draw me a bath, Enya, and make sure the fire is lit in my study.
    We'll eat there when the children are dressed."
    As she soaked her chilled body in a warm tub, it occurred to Haramis-and not,
    she thought, before time-to wonder what Mikayla's parents would think of the
    abrupt disappearance of their young charges. She cast out her thoughts to one of
    the nearby lammergeiers, asking it to carry one of her servants to take a
    message to the King and Queen. When the lammergeier agreed, she told Enya to
    choose a servant for the journey and be sure that he was dressed warmly enough
    for travel by lammergeier. Enya nodded and left the room.
    "I'm getting too old to go flying about like this," she grumbled to herself as
    she soaked in the tub, waiting for her chilled limbs to warm and become more
    responsive to her commands. Why, she wondered, had she brought them all here,
    instead of just returning to the Citadel? None of them had been dressed to fly
    in this climate, and that Oddling could have been permanently frozen. Haramis
    knew better than to bring an unprotected Nyssomu up into these heights-even more
    than two hundred years later, she remembered the day she had allowed Uzun to
    attempt to go into the mountains with her when she was searching for her
    Talisman. She touched her fingers to the Three-Winged Circle, which still hung
    by its golden chain between her breasts. On that occasion she had lost two days
    travel taking Uzun downhill and thawing him out. She should have remembered that
    before she let a Nyssomu mount a lammergeier. He would have been safer in the
    swamp. And she didn't need either him or the boy here. The only one she did need
    here was Mikayla. Am I getting senile? she wondered.
    She frowned, considering the question. She had discovered in her long career as
    Archimage that sometimes she did things that seemed strange to her at the time,
    but there would turn out to be a good reason for her actions, even though the
    reason was unknown to her when she acted. She felt that this was one of those
    times, but what could the reason be? The only thing that came to mind was that
    Mikayla's parents might have refused to let her take their daughter, but from
    what she had seen of them, that did not seem likely. And if they had tried to
    stop her, she would have taken the girl anyway, and there is nothing they could
    have done about it.
    She shrugged, got out of the tub, and dressed in her warmest clothes, even
    though her rooms were not at all chilly. Then she went to see her guests.
    Her servants had found them various garments, although nothing that really fit
    either child properly. Soon the children were seated dry and warm, albeit rather
    oddly garbed in a random assortment of ill-fitting clothing, before a fire in
    Haramis's study, with one of her housekeeper's good meals before them. Enya was
    very much pleased by this for, as she had often complained to Haramis, the
    Archimage did not eat enough to keep a bird alive; and Enya, who liked cooking,
    found the healthy appetites of the children a most welcome challenge to her
    considerable talents.
    Quasi had been thawed out enough to join them, but he was still rather sluggish
    and ate little. Both children seemed concerned about him and asked him
    repeatedly how he was feeling until Haramis finally lost her patience and told
    them to be quiet and eat.
    But when at last the empty dishes had been magically banished to the kitchen
    again, the Archimage glared at her young guests and at Quasi, who sat with
    folded hands, silently respectful beside them.
    "Tiresome little beasts," she remarked crossly, "I wonder if any of you three
    will prove to be worth the trouble to which you have put both me and my
    lammergeiers."
    Quasi, who had revived considerably during the meal, probably due to the fact
    that he was sitting next to the fire, said rather pertly, "Begging your pardon,
    Lady-and it was very good of you to come after us and I'm sure we're all most
    grateful-but we didn't none of us ask to be whisked away here. And what the King
    and the Queen will be thinking when no one can't find any trace of the princess
    and the young master, I'm sure I don't know."
    "That's right," piped up Mikayla, "Mama and Papa will be most terribly worried
    when they don't hear any word of us from anywhere."
    "Don't you dare to be impertinent," the Archimage growled. "I have sent a
    message to the King and the Queen, and they will know soon enough that you are
    both safe with me. And from what I've seen of your parents-and heard of your
    behavior," she added cuttingly, "it will be several days before they even begin
    to worry about you." Mikayla bit her lip and dropped her eyes to her lap.
    Secretly Haramis thought that if Mikayla's parents and Fiolon's guardians had a
    few days of worry about the children, it would only serve them right for taking
    such poor care of their charges, and for the way in which this had resulted in
    her, Haramis, having Her Tower turned upside down by these unexpected guests.
    "But you must understand," Mikayla said earnestly, "that we really didn't need
    rescuing at all. After all, madam"-she was not at all sure who the Archimage
    might be, but if only because of her abundance of white hair, she was sure that
    the elder lady was somehow entitled to respect-"we did escape from the Skriteks,
    and we managed to get to shore safely, and we weren't far from Quasi's village.
    So we really were getting along quite well, and if you rescued us you must have
    done it because you had some reason of your own, or some use for us, hadn't you?
    So it really isn't our fault that we're here, is it?"
    Fiolon said, shocked, "Oh, Mika, you shouldn't sound so ungrateful. I'm sure
    that whoever the Lady is, she'll have had excellent reasons for what she did."
    Until that very moment it had not occurred to the Archimage that neither of the
    young people had the faintest idea of who she was. She raised her head and said
    irritably, "Do you not know who I am?"
    "We don't have the faintest idea, Lady," Fiolon said politely. "I suppose by
    your birds you must at least be a mighty sorceress. I have heard of only one
    woman who could command the lammergeiers, and I believed that she died many
    years ago. You could not possibly be the old Archimage of Ruwenda?" He
    hesitated. "Or could you?"
    Haramis realized that she should have been prepared for this -if she had really
    thought about it, she would have known that none of them had ever set eyes on
    her before. And from what she had seen of the King's attitude toward them, she
    would wager that their education had been neglected as well.
    "I am not the old Archimage, no," she declared. "Her name was Binah, and she
    died many years ago, before any of you young people were born. I am the new
    Archimage-it would hardly be right to say the young Archimage now-and my name is
    Haramis."
    Fiolon gasped, obviously the name meant something to him, but Mikayla still
    looked blank. Haramis frowned at her. "I am also your kinswoman. Don't imagine
    that I am proud of the relationship," she added cuttingly. "I'm not."
    Mikayla rose to her feet and curtsied. She had beautiful manners when she chose
    to use them, Haramis realized, presumably having been schooled extensively in
    court etiquette by the Queen. But it would appear that she seldom chose to use
    them.
    "Is it permitted to ask why we have been brought here, my Lady Archimage?"
    Haramis sighed; she had lost almost all her enthusiasm for choosing this
    impertinent young girl as her successor. But after all, what choice did she
    have? It wasn't really her choice to make, just her job to train the girl. At
    least, Mikayla was Anigel's greatgrandchild-or was that
    great-great-grandchild?-and must have some of her ancestress's talents. She
    would simply have to make the best of it.
    She summoned all her self-control and said, "Like all creatures, I am mortal. I
    must train my successor before I die. Would it please you, Mikayla, to become
    Archimage when, as all things must, I pass on to whatever is the next stage of
    existence?"
    Mikayla stared at her, her mouth hanging open. Haramis hoped that her expression
    was merely astonishment, but it bore a definite resemblance to horror. It was
    several minutes before the girl managed to speak.
    "The idea had never occurred to me, my lady. What does an Archimage do?"
    "Mika!" Fiolon's reproving whisper wasn't quite soft enough. Haramis turned her
    attention to him.
    "Did you have something to say, young man?" she inquired acidly.
    Politeness lost out to curiosity rather quickly. "Are you the Archimage Haramis
    who was one of the triplet princesses?" he asked. "The one who fought the great
    battle with the evil sorcerer Orogastus and defeated him…" His voice trailed off
    and he looked around excitedly. "This is the Tower that he used to live in,
    isn't it?" he asked enthusiastically.
    Haramis raised her eyebrows. "It is," she replied. "How do you come to know
    those old stories?"
    "I like music," Fiolon said self-consciously. He looked down and traced a half
    circle in the carpet underfoot with his toe, "and I've memorized every ballad I
    could find, including all the ones by Master Uzun." The strings of the harp that
    had been sitting quietly in the corner rippled softly, as if it had heard
    something that pleased it. Fiolon looked sharply at it; Mikayla didn't seem to
    hear anything.
    "He does more than just 'like music,' " Mikayla said proudly. "He can play any
    instrument I've ever seen, and he has a beautiful voice. The King has him play
    at court whenever we have visitors."
    Haramis smiled at the boy. "Perhaps you will play for me before you leave,
    then."
    Fiolon bowed as well as he could while seated. "I should be honored, White
    Lady."
    "When are we leaving?" Mikayla asked.
    Haramis turned to her, repressing a sigh. I hope Binah never found me this
    unpromising, she thought. "You are not leaving, Mikayla," she said. "You are to
    remain here so that I can train you as my successor."
    "But I'm going to marry Fiolon," Mikayla protested, reaching out to him. He took
    her hand and held it, but he looked grave; obviously he had more of an idea of
    what was happening than she did. "That's the only good thing about being the
    youngest princess; my parents already have enough daughters for all the
    alliances they need, so they said that Fiolon and I could marry. We're going to
    live on a small estate near the Greenmire, and explore the ruins there, and
    teach our children about the Vanished Ones…"
    Her voice trailed off as Haramis just looked at her. "Our betrothal is to be
    announced next spring," Mikayla protested. "My parents promised. I'm just an
    extra princess-nobody has any use for me."
    "I have a use for you," Haramis said firmly. "The land has a use for you." She
    glared at Fiolon until he released Mikayla's hand, with obvious reluctance.
    "Fio?" Mikayla tried to cling to him. He patted her on the back and let her go.
    She looked at him, then at Haramis. "Am I not to be given any choice?"
    "No," said Haramis bluntly. "It is far too important to be left to the whim of a
    child."
    Mikayla looked at her for a long minute, and Haramis could almost see the wheels
    of thought going round in the young girl's head.
    She said, "If I am not to be given a choice, then I suppose it does not matter
    what I think about it." She curtsied to the Archimage more politely than Haramis
    had expected and said, "I am here to do your will, Lady Haramis."
    But Haramis felt that she was catching a bit of the edges of Mikayla's thoughts,
    and the girl's body language was most expressive. Mikayla might do Haramis's
    will, but it would be a long time before this was also Mikayla's will. A very
    long time indeed.
    Maybe I should have waited until I was at the point of death and dropped the job
    on her then, Haramis thought wearily. Training this one is not going to be easy.
    Chapter Five
    It was silent in the Archimage's study, with no sound except the snapping of the
    fire. Fiolon got up and walked to a beautifully inlaid harp every bit as tall as
    he, with silver strings and a frame of satiny reddish wood with white bone inlay
    at the top of its pillar. "What a beautiful harp, Lady Haramis," he said. "May I
    play upon it? I am sure its tone is as beautiful as any harp I have ever heard."
    Haramis said in surprise, "Can you play the harp, young Fiolon?"
    "Yes, I can, though I am really not expert. I have had lessons on many
    instruments; but I think of all of them, the harp is my favorite. It is almost
    impossible to make any sound upon a harp that is not beautiful."
    "I think you are right," said Haramis, and rose to her feet. "But this is no
    ordinary harp; nor does one play upon it, as with any ordinary instrument. This
    is Uzun, my wisest of Oddling counselors."
    "That's Master Uzun?" Fiolon asked in excited surprise. "I thought he must have
    died long ago."
    "When at last he came to the end of his natural life," Haramis explained, "it
    was my first act of great magic which conjured him into this harp so that I
    might always have the benefit of his wise counsel. I will introduce you to him;
    and if he is willing he may speak or even sing to you."
    Mikayla muttered, "I never heard such nonsense in my life. How can a harp be a
    counselor, whatever he was in life?"
    "I don't know," Fiolon said softly. "But at least so far, I am willing to
    believe anything the Lady says; do be careful, Mika."
    Haramis shot Mikayla a sharp glance but she said nothing. As she approached the
    harp she said, "Good evening, Uzun."
    "Good evening, Lady Haramis." The voice was strong and plangent, with a sweet
    singing tone, and did indeed seem to come forth from the sounding board of the
    tall harp that sat motionless on the carpet. Haramis glanced at Mikayla out of
    the corner of her eye. The girl appeared not quite ready to believe the evidence
    of her own ears. She was obviously telling herself that it must be some kind of
    clever trickery.
    "And who are the young people?" asked the voice. "I do not think I have met them
    before."
    Haramis said, "Master Uzun, I would like to introduce two of my young kinsfolk:
    Princess Mikayla of Ruwenda and Lord Fiolon of Var, the son of the late sister
    of the King."
    "I am very glad to meet your kinsfolk, my lady," Uzun replied, his voice
    rippling up and down his strings. "It is right that you should have someone to
    help you in the bearing of so many and such heavy burdens. Is it she whom you
    have chosen to take over your burdens when you are no longer able to do so?"
    "How well you know me, Uzun," Haramis said fondly.
    She looked at Mikayla, and she felt she could hear the thoughts running through
    the girl's immature, undisciplined mind. The harp didn't have eyes-at least not
    so far as she could tell, so how could it see them? Certainly there was
    something very strange going on here, and obviously Mikayla was still trying to
    reason out what it was and how it worked.
    Haramis said sharply, "Now do you believe me, you foolish girl?"
    Mikayla looked dubiously at her. "My lady, are you really asking me to believe
    that you turned a person-a dead person-into a harp?"
    "Good, you are so far honest at least," Haramis said briskly. "If you doubt me,
    always say so honestly, and I will try to explain; better to express honest
    doubt than to pretend agreement. Better always to tell the truth, even if the
    truth will make me angry." And speaking of anger… "You are angry with me now,
    are you not, Mikayla?"
    Mikayla glared at her. She said, "Yes, I am." She turned and glared at Fiolon,
    too. "Don't look at me like that, Fiolon; she asked me. And considering that she
    has essentially kidnapped both of us, announced her intention of keeping me here
    against my will, and then told me she can turn a person into a harp without so
    much as a by your leave, I don't think you can realistically expect me not to be
    annoyed with her-at the very least."
    Fiolon looked up and gulped. He said, "But, Mika, do you really think it's a
    good idea to get angry at someone who can turn you into something else? I mean,
    even if you are angry, you don't have to lie about it, just keep your mouth
    shut."
    Uzun's voice sang through the harp. "Princess Mikayla, you are being unfair to
    our Lady Haramis. She certainly did not turn me into a harp without my consent,
    and she worked very hard to do it."
    Mikayla walked over to Uzun's side, reached up, and touched a tentative finger
    to the bone inlay on the harp. "How did she do it?" she asked. "Was this bone
    part of your body? Did she kill you to work the spell, or did you die naturally
    and she just chopped up your body? And obviously you can hear, but can you see?
    Can you move by your own will?"
    "Your thirst for morbid detail can wait until you have had enough training to
    understand what you are talking about," the harp replied. "And, for future
    reference, I prefer not to be touched without my consent." Uzun's rich voice
    sounded annoyed as it vibrated into silence, and Haramis smiled.
    Fiolon asked, "Where did he go? Tell him to come back-I mean, ask him, please."
    Haramis looked grave. "Even I do not give orders to Uzun, my boy. I am afraid
    that between you, you children have really managed to offend him, and it may be
    a considerable time before he speaks to either of you again-or to me, because I
    allowed you such rudeness as to question him."
    Mikayla rolled her eyes. "Why would he blame you for our behavior? You met us
    only today; it's not as if you had anything to do with our upbringing or
    training. What could he possibly think you could do about the way we act?"
    But Fiolon said, "You should be polite to him, Mikayla-I told you about him,
    remember? He was the court musician to King Krain, and an amateur magician as
    well, and he accompanied the Princess Haramis on the first part of her Quest."
    Mikayla looked at him and shook her head. "Honestly, Fio, do you remember
    everything from every song you've ever heard?"
    Fiolon thought about it for a moment. "Yes, I think I do," he replied.
    Mikayla sighed. "Well, try to remember that I don't. A lot of your favorite
    songs are nearly two hundreds old, and they all sound alike to me. And who was
    King Krain?"
    "He was my father," Haramis replied, "and he was murdered horribly when the
    Labornoki army invaded-I'll spare you the gruesome details. It's time for you to
    go to bed now, and you don't need nightmares." She yanked abruptly at the
    bellpull and then sat in a silence none of the others dared to break until Enya
    appeared. Then she ordered Enya to see that the children and Quasi were put to
    bed, and she stalked from the room without even waiting for Enya's
    acknowledgment of her orders.
    Behind her retreating form, Fiolon whispered to Mikayla, "I don't think you
    should have mentioned her father. In fact, if I were you, I wouldn't mention her
    family at all."
    A little while later the children were put to bed in the Archimage's guest room,
    in two narrow beds side by side. Haramis went to her room and set up her scrying
    basin. "Let's see what these two do when left alone together," she muttered to
    herself.
    At first there was nothing interesting to see. Mikayla, who had after all had a
    long and tiring day, was quickly asleep. Fiolon, however, seemed restless and
    unable to fall asleep. He kept turning over and over in bed, and sitting up at
    intervals, before lying down and trying to go to sleep again without success.
    Haramis suspected that he was remembering the scene before the fire with Uzun,
    and that he wished to go downstairs again and make his peace with Master Uzun
    before he slept. The boy obviously had sense enough to realize that the one
    thing Mikayla did not need was to make an enemy of Master Uzun.
    And he is right, Haramis thought, Mikayla should take care to be on good terms
    with Uzun; even in his present form, he is the only one of my counselors still
    living. Except for a few Oddling servants, most of them Vispi, there isn't
    anyone else living in the Tower besides me and Uzun.
    When Fiolon got out of bed and started downstairs, Haramis made no move to stop
    him. She sat quietly and watched, prepared to derive what amusement she could
    from the coming confrontation. Uzun had always been uncommonly stubborn; it
    would be interesting to watch how Fiolon coped with him.
    The study was empty except for the flickering of the coals of the fire on the
    great harp, whose wood glowed reddish bronze in the firelight. Fiolon knelt on
    the hearth rug before the harp and whispered, "Master Uzun, I beg you to forgive
    my cousin Mika; she really doesn't mean any harm. It's just the way she is; she
    never believes anything unless she can see it and measure it. She's the sort of
    person who likes to take things apart to see how they work; she's not good at
    taking things on faith or believing in magic she can't reason out rules for."
    Master Uzun obstinately kept silence. Haramis waited and watched. Then it
    obviously occurred to Fiolon-whether it was his own thought or whether it
    somehow came to him from the silent magician before him-that if Master Uzun was
    to forgive Mikayla, the girl must come herself and beg his pardon for her
    thoughtless words. He rose to his feet and headed for the stairs. Haramis
    continued to follow his path in the scrying bowl.
    Fiolon lost no time. He stole quietly upstairs to the guest room where Mika was
    sleeping. No more was visible of his cousin than one red curl above the pillow.
    Fiolon tweaked it and Mikayla surfaced and opened her eyes.
    "Fio? Why aren't you asleep? It isn't morning yet, is it? It's still dark!
    What's the matter?"
    "Mikayla, you must come down to the study at once and beg Master Uzun's pardon."
    "Are you out of your mind, Fio? It's the middle of the night! He'll probably be
    asleep-assuming he sleeps." She frowned at him. "And your voice sounds funny.
    Are you getting sick? We all got badly chilled on the journey here, and you
    probably worse than I. At least I was between Haramis and the bird, so I was
    sheltered somewhat, but you must have taken the brunt of the winds." She reached
    but a hand to touch his forehead and gasped. "Fiolon, you're burning with fever.
    Get back into bed right now!"
    Fiolon scowled at her and said, "Not until you apologize to Master Uzun."
    Mikayla sighed. "Oh, very well. Anything to make you stop acting like an idiot.
    You're sick, Fiolon; you should be in bed." She got out of bed, stopping only to
    slip a pair of warm slippers on her bare feet, and followed him down the stairs.
    The red coals of the fire had burned down to a sullen glow. Fiolon made up the
    fire and fanned it to a small flame, while Mikayla knelt before the gleaming
    harp.
    "Master Uzun," she said with contrition, and rising, she dropped a deep court
    curtsy.
    "I entreat you to forgive me, Master Uzun," she murmured ceremoniously. "If the
    Lady Archimage does indeed choose me as her successor, I shall want friends
    here. I most humbly beg your pardon, and I assure you that I meant no offense,
    nor did I mean to doubt you." She was silent for a while. "Please do forgive me,
    sir," she whispered again after a few moments.
    There was silence in the room. Then with a long sound like a sigh, Uzun's
    strings sighed a ripple of music and he breathed, "Indeed I do forgive you most
    heartily, little mistress-Princess Mikayla. We shall be friends, I hope, from
    this moment. And you, too, young Master Fiolon. It was courteous of you to wish
    to amend this misunderstanding." What he did not say-but Haramis, watching from
    her room, understood it, nevertheless, as clearly as if Uzun had spoken
    aloud-was that he would like to further his acquaintance with Fiolon. But Uzun
    would guess that Fiolon would not be remaining here much longer.
    "You must not think of yourself as a prisoner here, Princess," Uzun said, almost
    as if he were picking up Mikayla's thoughts. "It is a great honor to be chosen
    as Archimage, and I am certain that you will do the job well when the time
    comes. And you will have the benefit of proper training-a luxury the Lady
    Haramis did not have."
    "Why did she choose me?" Mikayla asked. "I'm really not the magical type."
    Beside her, Fiolon gave a feeble snort of laughter. Obviously he agreed with her
    assessment of her character.
    "The Archimage doesn't choose her successor," Uzun explained. "Actually, I
    believe the land itself makes the choice. But when the time comes, the Archimage
    knows, so that she can pass on the office."
    "How was the Lady Haramis chosen?" Fiolon asked curiously. "Your ballads never
    quite said."
    "Alas for my weakness." Uzun sighed. "I wasn't with her then. I had to leave her
    when she journeyed into the mountains here in search of her Talisman."
    "You would have frozen to death if you had tried to follow her," Mikayla pointed
    out gently. Haramis was glad to see that the child appeared to have at least a
    little appreciation of other people's feelings. "Quasi got frozen today and had
    to be thawed out; remember how sluggish he was at supper?"
    "Quasi?" the harp asked. "Was that a Nyssomu with you? Nobody introduced him to
    me."
    Mikayla stared intently at the harp for several long seconds. "You are blind,"
    she said with certainty. "And you can't move, can you? You're a person trapped
    in a harp who can hear and talk, but that's all. How could •she have done this
    to you?"
    "She wanted to keep me alive," Uzun said quietly.
    "You taught her magic when she was a child," Fiolon said, hastily changing the
    subject. "That's in one of the Chronicles. Is that why she was chosen, because
    she already knew magic?"
    "It can't be," Mikayla objected before Uzun could answer. Haramis suppressed a
    sigh. Obviously in Mikayla's case good manners were intermittent in the extreme.
    "Because then I wouldn't have been chosen. I don't know much magic, Fio- you're
    the one who can do magic."
    Fiolon blushed so deeply it was visible even in the flickering firelight. "Just
    little tricks, nothing like Master Uzun or the Lady Archimage. But all three of
    the triplets could work magic, Mika, so I'll bet you can learn. You've never
    tried to work any major spells, so you have no way of knowing if you have any
    magical ability or not." He thought for a moment and added, "I'm pretty sure you
    do have some sort of magical ability-remember, you said that something was wrong
    just before the Skritek started hatching."
    "I know I have no interest in magic," Mikayla muttered. "It's a pity she didn't
    chose you."
    Uzun said softly, "I know this undoubtedly comes as quite a shock to you, child,
    but it will turn out for the best. You will see."
    Mikayla sighed. "All I ever wanted to do was marry Fiolon and explore the Mazy
    Mire."
    "Then you have more in common with the Lady Haramis than you realize," Uzun
    said. "She was betrothed to Prince Fiomaki of Var. Fifty days before the wedding
    day, King Voltrik's army attacked Ruwenda. And she was heiress to the throne.
    Believe me, Princess Haramis had a lot of plans that didn't include being
    Archimage." A sound like a chuckle rippled along the strings. "And I didn't have
    to be there to be sure that she must have given the Archimage Binah quite an
    argument about it."
    I certainly tried, Haramis thought, but when she died so suddenly, it did rather
    cut short the discussion.
    "You must return to your beds now, young people," Uzun said. "I wish you a very
    good night and pleasant dreams." His tone left no room for doubt in either of
    their minds that they had been dismissed, as if from the presence of a courtier.
    Both children bowed to him and went upstairs to bed. As soon as they had fallen
    asleep, Haramis emptied the scrying bowl and made her way somewhat stiffly to
    her own bed-sitting in one position over the bowl had not been kind to her body.
    As she fell asleep she thought that Uzun was likely to be very helpful in
    training Mikayla. The Lords of the Air knew that she was going to need all the
    help she could get!
    Chapter Six
    It was Haramis's firm intent that Fiolon depart for his home the next day. She
    wanted to waste no time in separating him from Mikayla. The girl would learn
    what Haramis wished to teach her more quickly without the distraction of her
    childhood playmate's presence. It was time for Mikayla to grow up and take on an
    adult's responsibilities.
    Unfortunately, Mikayla had been correct the night before when she said that
    Fiolon was sick. By the time the children woke -rather late in the morning-he
    was having trouble breathing and complained feebly that his chest hurt. When
    Haramis came to check on him herself, Mikayla glared at her.
    "He has lung fever, Lady," she snapped, "which is only to be expected after the
    time he spent yesterday flying through cold air in soaking-wet clothes. Did you
    even notice that his clothes were frozen on his body by the time we got here?"
    Actually, Haramis had been sufficiently cold and miserable herself by then that
    she hadn't noticed, but it did not seem a good idea to admit that. "Don't make
    such a fuss, girl," she said. "I'm sorry he's ill, but my housekeeper will take
    good care of him and he'll recover soon." He had better, she thought, I want him
    out of here as soon as may be. "As for you"-she frowned sternly at Mikayla-"his
    illness is no excuse for you to be still in your night-clothes at this hour of
    day. Get dressed at once, and then come to my study." She swept out of the room,
    ignoring the stamp of slippered feet behind her.
    It was a full half hour by the time Mikayla turned up in the study as ordered.
    By then, the breakfast Haramis had ordered for the child was cold. Haramis
    herself had eaten hours earlier. "You have a choice, Mikayla," she told the
    girl. "You can be on time for meals or you can eat them cold. Today, you have
    chosen cold breakfast. Eat it quickly; we have a lot to do."
    Mikayla shoved cold porridge into her mouth and said, "What?"
    "Don't talk with your mouth full," Haramis said automatically. "You need to
    learn about magic, starting, no doubt, at the very beginning. You do at least
    know how to read, I trust."
    Mikayla nodded and continued to eat porridge. She didn't seem to notice the
    taste or the temperature, or even to be truly aware of the fact that she was
    eating it. Haramis frowned. Obviously this was not someone who could be
    motivated through food. What did this girl value, other than Fiolon? How could
    Haramis reach her?
    Mikayla finished the last bite and dropped her spoon in the empty bowl with a
    clatter. Haramis sent the dish back to the kitchen with a wave of her hand-and
    Mikayla didn't even look impressed. Of course, she had seen Haramis transport
    away the dirty dishes the night before, so she knew it was possible, but if she
    were going to simply take magic for granted… Well, maybe that would be a help in
    her training-at least she wouldn't spend hours marveling over every little
    thing. But surely some sense of the wonder of it all was desirable.
    Haramis took Mikayla to the library, where she started with a simple explanation
    of basic magic and how it worked.
    "It is clear that you know very little of magecraft, Mikayla. Let this, then, be
    your first lesson in that art. A mage must never do anything without need, no
    matter how simple. I sent Quasi home this morning by lammergeier because he
    would have frozen to death otherwise. I called the lammergeiers to you two at
    first, only because when I rescued you from the river there was grave danger.
    You had lost your boat, and you had not yet learned much about communication
    with the Skritek-kind. So I was forced to rescue you from that danger into which
    folly had led you before you were schooled to extricate yourselves. Do you
    understand?"
    "No," Mikayla said. "I don't understand. In the first place, we weren't in any
    particular danger. The nearest Skritek were a half day's journey away-by boat,
    going downriver!"
    "Meeting up with the Skritek is not a risk a sensible person takes with her own
    life, nor a risk a responsible person takes with the lives of her companions."
    Mikayla shuddered involuntarily, remembering Traneo's fate. But she remembered a
    few other things as well. "We weren't far from Quasi's village. When you dragged
    us out of there and brought us here, Quasi nearly froze to death and Fiolon got
    lung fever. But other than that, my Lady Archimage, is it wrong to use the
    lammergeiers?"
    "It is not wrong," said the Archimage, carefully ignoring the girl's sarcasm.
    "It is only unwise and unnecessary. Who knows when some grave danger to us, or
    to the land, may arise, and the lammergeiers be overwearied when I most need
    them? A day will come, I trust, when you will know what is and what is not
    necessary-and you will not find that knowledge written in any book, nor stored
    in any of the devices of the Vanished Ones. If you do not find that knowledge
    imprinted within your own heart, Mikayla, then, when you most need it, you will
    be without it. This is the only thing I can teach you, and if we are fortunate,
    that will be enough. Everything else, spells and such things, you could learn
    from some Oddling herb-wife. That is what Orogastus never knew-though there are
    some who would not care to hear me say so."
    Mikayla had fastened on something else the Archimage had said. "You said that we
    had not yet learned much of how to communicate with the Skritek-kind. Will you
    then teach me the language of the hatchling Skriteks?"
    The Archimage nodded. "It is more accurate to say you will learn to communicate
    with them within your heart. That knowledge may not be in words; I do not know
    if they truly have such a thing as one could call language; but you will be able
    to understand them."
    "To understand a hatchling Skritek? I think I would rather learn to kill them!"
    Mikayla was still seeing in her mind's eye how Traneo had been devoured by that
    Skritek hatchling.
    "That is a very cruel and shortsighted point of view. In the purpose of life
    there may be some reason even for the Skriteks; though I confess I do not yet
    know it." She noted Mikayla's surprised glance with inner amusement. "Oh, yes,
    there are many things even I do not know." She could tell this was a new idea to
    Mikayla, that there was anything the old sorceress did not know.
    "You feel about the Skritek thus, because you personally can put them to no use,
    is it not so?" Haramis continued the lesson.
    "I cannot imagine what good the Skriteks are to anyone."
    "Is that the Skriteks' fault, or is it the failure of your imagination?" the
    Archimage asked. "If nothing else, their eggs are some use as food for the
    Oddlings."
    Mikayla found herself wondering why the Oddlings did not keep some kind of
    domestic fowl instead; but it was true that there was no place in the Mire to
    house and run yard fowl of any kind. She thought that the advantage of not
    coping with Skriteks would at least allow the Oddlings to seek out some other
    food. But she did not want to sound quarrelsome, and so she held her peace.
    Haramis lectured on for the rest of the morning. Then she selected a book on
    scrying and handed it to Mikayla. "After lunch, start reading this. And remember
    that I shall be questioning you on it later, so be sure to pay attention to what
    you are reading. Always remember, there is nothing in the world more important
    than learning. You never know when some seemingly insignificant thing will turn
    out to be vital. It's usually not the big things that kill or save you, it's the
    little details. So learn carefully and well."
    Mikayla nodded, but she looked bored and rebellious. Oh, well, Haramis thought,
    I don't care how she feels about me, just as long as she learns. But I don't
    understand her. I would have given everything I ever owned for the education I'm
    giving her-why can't she see its value?
    Mikayla disappeared after lunch while Haramis was in her study talking to Uzun.
    Haramis had assumed that she was in the library until she went to find her for
    dinner. But the library was empty, as was the bedroom she had told Enya to
    assign to the girl-had anyone told her that this was now her room? Haramis
    rolled her eyes and went down the hall toward Fiolon's room, willing to bet that
    she would find the girl there.
    Sure enough, she heard Mikayla's voice as she approached the room. She stopped
    just outside the door to hear what the girl was saying. It took her only a few
    seconds to realize that Mikayla was not carrying on a conversation; she was
    reading aloud from the book on scrying. Haramis poked her head around the door.
    Fiolon was asleep, but Mikayla sat on a wooden stool at the side of his bed.
    With her left hand she held one of his hands, and she was balancing the book on
    her lap with her other hand and reading it aloud to him.
    "I don't think he's getting much out of this," Haramis remarked, "and it's time
    for dinner."
    Mikayla, sticking a finger in the book to mark where she was, twisted in place
    to look at Haramis. "If you mean that he's not absorbing every word I read," she
    said coldly, "no doubt you are correct. He was delirious before he fell asleep.
    But the sound of my voice does seem to calm him. Besides," she added before
    Haramis could protest her choice of reading location, "when I read aloud to him,
    I remember more of what I'm reading than I would if I were reading to myself."
    Haramis decided it wasn't worth arguing about. She was tired and hungry and not
    used to having children about. "Come and eat dinner," she said, "and after
    dinner, I expect you to go to your own room."
    "I have another room?" Mikayla asked.
    "Yes," Haramis said firmly, "you do. I'll have Enya show you where it is after
    dinner."
    Mikayla looked around the room that Enya showed her to. It was still on the same
    floor as the one Fiolon was in, which Mikayla was glad of. She didn't intend to
    be separated from Fiolon if she could possibly avoid it. One wall of the room
    was stone, obviously the outer wall of the Tower. It had two small glazed
    windows, through which nothing could be seen in the dark, but the rest of the
    wall was covered with tapestries.
    The room was surprisingly warm for an outer room in a stone building, even
    though the remaining walls were covered with wood paneling and there was a
    fireplace surrounded by colored tiles. Mikayla investigated and found a small
    grille in the wall next to the bed, at about the level of her knees. Warm air
    flowed out through the grille, and that, combined with the heat from the fire,
    explained the room's unusual warmth. Mikayla pictured in her mind the other
    rooms she had seen and was pretty certain that she had seen grilles like this
    one in all of them. That explained why the Tower was warm enough for Haramis to
    keep Nyssomu servants in this climate, and it was probably also the reason why
    the Vispi here wore such filmy draperies instead of normal clothing.
    The bed was grander than anything Mikayla had ever slept in. Its canopy was
    carved of gonda wood and hung with brocade, and the mattress was at the level of
    her shoulders. It had soft sheets and a large down comforter as well as three
    down pillows. Mikayla decided that she was in no danger of catching cold here,
    but she wasn't at all sure she wouldn't suffocate.
    Someone had laid out a nightgown for her on a bench by the bed, next to the
    wardrobe. Dropping the book on scrying, which had not proved quite as dull as
    she had feared, on a table that was placed, along with a pair of red leather
    chairs, next to the fire, she put on the nightgown, climbed the three steps of
    the miniature wooden staircase set next to the bed, and wriggled her way under
    the covers. It was a bit suffocating, but Mikayla fell asleep too quickly to
    care.
    In the next few days she learned many interesting things, even though she missed
    her home. After she had finished the book on scrying, Haramis taught her to scry
    into the Greenmire, which was the southern section of the Mazy Mire. Since this
    was on the other side of the country from the Tower on Mount Brom, it did at
    least establish that Mikayla could learn to see the entire land.
    Haramis made her scry it in detail, right down to the tiny stinging insects,
    which made Mikayla glad to be in the Tower watching them, instead of in the
    swamp being stung by them.
    "I suppose you can think of no reason for their existence, either?" Haramis
    asked Mikayla, with the air of a challenge.
    Mikayla, looking at the ugly little things, said morosely that she personally
    could think of no special reason for their existence; but that, knowing
    something of the way Haramis's mind worked, she was quite sure there must be
    one, even if she herself did not yet know it. In any case she supposed the fish
    in the Mire enjoyed catching them, and they were some good, even if only for
    fish food.
    "Good," said the Archimage, "you are beginning to understand some things about
    this land." Mikayla could not imagine what good that knowledge would be to her,
    but she supposed someday the Archimage would tell her-at least if it was
    anything she ought to know. And if not, she supposed there was no reason to
    burden her mind with it.
    She spent every afternoon in Fiolon's room, reading whatever book she had been
    assigned aloud to him and telling him about her lessons. She noticed, however,
    that Haramis seemed determined that she and Fiolon not be alone together; after
    that first day, even when he was still sick and raving, there was always a
    servant there with them. As the weeks went by, Fiolon's fever broke and his mind
    cleared. Mikayla found it a considerable relief when he could carry on
    intelligible conversations again. But still, one of the servants was always with
    them, so Mikayla felt certain that Haramis's concern was not for Fiolon's
    health.
    In fact, Haramis had a very lively concern for Fiolon's health; she was most
    eager to see him healthy enough to leave. But he had been very ill, and while
    his mind was healing rapidly, his body was not. He remained thin and pale, and
    it required the efforts of both Mikayla and a servant to move him from bed to
    chair.
    At the beginning of summer, fearing that Fiolon might have some disease in
    addition to the lung fever, Haramis went so far as to send a lammergeier for a
    Vispi healer from the village of Movis on Mount Rotolo.
    Mount Rotolo was the westernmost of the three mountain peaks of which Mount
    Brom, where the Tower was, was the eastern one. The middle peak, Mount Gidris,
    was sacred; no one lived there. Haramis herself had been there only once, on her
    Quest to fetch her Talisman. It had been in an ice cave on the southern flank,
    and the cave had collapsed around her when she removed the Talisman. Her
    lammergeier had pulled her out in the nick of time and Haramis hadn't been back
    to Mount Gidris since. She didn't intend to return there, either.
    The healer examined Fiolon carefully, talked to him alone for a long time, spoke
    briefly and reassuringly to Mikayla, and told Haramis to have patience. "He'll
    be with you for some months yet, I feel," she told Haramis, "but he will recover
    fully in time. I am certain of that."
    So Haramis continued to teach Mikayla in the mornings, refrained from asking how
    she spent the afternoons, and made certain that there was always a servant in
    Fiolon's room when Mikayla was not with Haramis. At least the girl was making
    progress. As the months went by she mastered scrying, as well as the simple
    teleportation Haramis used to clear the table or fetch a book from the library,
    although she made Mikayla fetch books in person so that she would learn where
    each book belonged and would be able to reshelve them properly. "Remember always
    that a book misshelved is knowledge lost." Mikayla sighed, nodded, and memorized
    the proper location of each book on the library shelves.
    She also learned communication with the lammergeiers, although Haramis would not
    allow her to ride them. She now had clothing suitable to wear indoors, but
    nothing heavy enough to be worn outside ever found its way into her wardrobe.
    Mikayla intended to do something about that someday, but she was also learning
    when and how to resist Haramis and how much she could get away with. As long as
    she was allowed to see Fiolon every day, she tried not to upset Haramis too
    much.
    It wasn't her fault that Haramis walked in one afternoon to find her and Fiolon
    playing teleport catch. Teleport catch was a game they had developed; it was
    played with a small-and preferably unbreakable-object. Today they were using a
    ladu fruit. The point of the game was to teleport the object to a place
    somewhere within arm's reach of the other person, who then had to catch it by
    hand without letting it hit the floor or the bed and then teleport it back.
    Since the object could be materialized anywhere in the half circle in front and
    to both sides of you, spotting the object in time to catch it was tricky-unless,
    of course, you cheated a bit and used telepathy to tell where the other person
    was sending it, which didn't work if the other person was using shields against
    telepathy…
    They had worked out several variations of the rules and the game had become
    quite competitive. Today they were both shielding their minds, which took a fair
    amount of concentration. Haramis watched from the doorway for quite a while
    before they noticed she was there. She had plenty of time to observe that while
    Mikayla was quite competent, Fiolon was much better than that.
    The next day, Haramis had the healer back, and Fiolon started intensive physical
    therapy. He was walking within a week, however reluctantly, and two weeks later
    Haramis decreed that he was well enough to return home to the Citadel. She
    completely ignored Mikayla's protest that Fiolon was too ill-or had been too
    ill-to be sent home in the depths of winter. "Not that the climate here is any
    different in the summer," she added.
    "We'll start studying weather and land sense next," Haramis informed her. "I
    assure you that you will soon learn to notice the difference in seasons-even
    here."
    Chapter Seven
    The Archimage ordered riding clothes and camping gear assembled for Fiolon.
    Since the Tower was not stocked with much in the way of human clothing, it was
    fortunate that he was small enough to wear Vispi clothing when necessary. As
    soon as the servants had packed supplies for him and dressed him in warm
    clothing, she led him and Mikayla down the long flights of stairs which finally
    opened onto a great plaza at the front of the Tower. Mikayla hadn't noticed this
    plaza before; they had landed on the top of the other side of the building when
    they arrived and she hadn't been outdoors since. With Fiolon for company, she
    hadn't been getting too stir-crazy, but she was afraid that this was about to
    change. She had spent a large part of her life outdoors before coming here, and
    she had been accustomed to coming and going as she wished for several years
    before being shut up in the Tower. Fiolon's imminent departure was making
    Mikayla feel very anxious; she felt even more like a prisoner than she had
    before when both of them were there.
    Haramis had neglected to provide her with any clothing heavy enough to be worn
    outside, and Mikayla suspected that the omission was deliberate. At the moment
    she was wrapped in one of Haramis's cloaks, which was too long for her but would
    keep her from freezing while she said good-bye to Fiolon.
    But Mikayla's feet, in the slippers she wore, were getting very cold and wet.
    The plaza was ankle-deep in snow.
    There was a great chasm on the far side of the plaza, with no apparent way
    across it. Mikayla expected to see the Archimage summon the lammergeiers.
    Instead a large door to their left opened, and a Vispi led a pair of fronials
    down a ramp that led upward beyond the door. Mikayla gaped at them. "How do they
    get across there?" she asked pointing to the chasm. "Magic?"
    The Archimage looked cross. "Not a bit of it," she answered. "When Orogastus
    built this Tower, he equipped it with every bit of the technology of the
    Vanished Ones that he could beg, buy, or steal. Of course," she added with
    disdain, "he thought it was sorcery. I think even after so many years, he never
    knew the difference. But you, Mikayla, at least, should learn what that
    difference is. It is not right to command the lammergeiers when nonmagical
    methods will work. This will be one of your most important lessons; when it is
    right to use sorcery, and when it is not."
    "And I'm really going to learn it from someone who uses sorcery to clear the
    breakfast table," Mikayla muttered rebelliously.
    Haramis ignored her. With practice, it was getting easier-and the Lords of the
    Air knew she was getting plenty of practice.
    The fronials were a fine matched pair, and Fiolon watched with amazement as they
    stood quietly while his baggage was put on one of them by the Vispi groom.
    He looked over the edge of the great chasm, with a river flowing at the bottom.
    "This would be very fine, Lady, if either the fronials-or I-or my baggage-could
    fly," he said politely. "Are you going to teach me to fly? Or can these fly
    already?"
    "No, of course not," said Haramis. "Although Orogastus probably thought that
    this was sorcery." She pulled from the depths of her robe a small silver pipe
    and blew on it. It emitted a high, thin tone, and as the children watched in
    amazement a narrow steel causeway extruded from the edge of the chasm and
    quickly grew into a bridge.
    Mikayla gasped. She thought there might be something very interesting in
    learning about this new technology-at least as interesting as the music boxes
    she and Fiolon had scrupulously divided between them. She had kept three, two of
    which were duplicates of ones they had found, and the rest he had carefully
    packed along with the clothing and food the Archimage had provided him. As long
    as she was stuck here with the Archimage, she might as well learn as much as she
    could. And preferably learn things that interested her, not just what Lady
    Haramis thought a proper young Archimage-in-training ought to know.
    Unfortunately, Haramis seemed to have no interest in technology, and she
    definitely had no feel for it. She can complain all she wants about my lack of
    feeling for magic, Mikayla thought, but at least I can feel technology. All she
    can do is use it-if she can figure out somehow how it works-or if Orogastus told
    her how it worked before she killed him.
    Ignoring the Archimage's disapproving glare and the snow soaking her house
    slippers, Mikayla slogged across the plaza to where Fiolon was preparing to
    mount the lead fronial. "You will be careful, won't you?" she said. "I don't
    know why she's sending you off on a fronial in the middle of winter-" She didn't
    finish the sentence.
    Fiolon put an arm around her shoulders and gave her a reassuring hug. "I'll be
    careful, Mika. I've camped out in the winter before-we did this a few years ago,
    remember?"
    "Yes, but you weren't alone then. I was with you, and we took two of the
    guardsmen along-it was the only way my parents would let us go; they said it was
    too dangerous otherwise." Mikayla bit her lip. "I don't think Haramis would
    mourn overmuch if you met with a fatal accident." She looked straight into his
    eyes. "But I warn you, Fio, if you go and get yourself killed, I'll never speak
    to you again!"
    They both chuckled at the silliness of that threat. "I won't get killed," Fiolon
    said. "I promise." He looked at Haramis and sighed. "She's glaring at us again,
    and I really do need to leave before it gets dark."
    "Yes," Mikayla agreed, "I know you do."
    "Then maybe you would consider letting go of my jacket," Fiolon said.
    Mikayla looked down at her hands. She was clinging to the sleeves of Fiolon's
    short jacket so tightly that her knuckles were white. She forced her stiff
    fingers to release their grip, then defiantly leaned forward and kissed Fiolon
    on the cheek. "Take care," she said fiercely. "And fare well."
    "Be well, Mika," Fiolon said, patting her shoulder and turning to mount the
    fronial. He looked down at her. "Try to be good."
    "Do you really think Haramis is going to give me any chance to be otherwise?"
    Mikayla tried to smile. She didn't want Fiolon's last memory of her to be of a
    tear-streaked face.
    She held the smile by pure effort of will until Fiolon had his back to her and
    was halfway across the bridge. By then Haramis had crossed the plaza to join
    her. She put a hand on Mikayla's shoulder, but Mikayla angrily shrugged it off.
    As they stood watching Fiolon ride out of sight across the causeway and down the
    slopes, with the second fronial behind him on a leading rope, Mikayla asked
    again, "Why should you have sent him on this long journey alone by bad roads and
    passes and through heavy snow, when you can command the lammergeiers and by
    tonight he could have been safe in his own bed?"
    Haramis sighed. "How many times do I have to tell you, Mikayla, that it is not
    wise to use the lammergeiers if it is not absolutely necessary?"
    Mikayla shrugged. Fiolon was out of sight by now, and the girl returned to the
    Tower and started to trudge up the stairs, head bowed and eyes cast down to the
    step in front of her. Haramis followed slowly, with an occasional pause to catch
    her breath, but Mikayla maintained a steady automatic pace all the way up to the
    living quarters in the middle of the Tower. And she didn't speak to Haramis for
    the rest of the day.
    That evening after supper, Haramis gave her a small fabric-covered box. When
    Mikayla opened the latch, she found that it contained two silver spheres. When
    she picked one up, it made the same sort of chiming noise as the small spheres
    she and Fiolon had found in the ruins, except that this one was louder and
    lower-pitched, probably because its diameter was approximately twice that of the
    one she still wore about her neck.
    She hadn't shown it to Haramis, and since she kept it tucked under her clothes,
    its chiming was muted, so she didn't think Haramis knew about it. Mikayla had
    the firm intention of keeping it, as a reminder of Fiolon and how happy they had
    been that day in the ruins. Haramis often spoke of her approaching death,
    leaving Mikayla to hope that she might be free within a few years. Haramis
    couldn't separate Mikayla and Fiolon if she were dead.
    If Haramis knew of the small sphere pendant, she made no mention of it, merely
    telling Mikayla to pick up the second sphere. It chimed at a slightly lower
    pitch, even though the spheres were outwardly identical.
    "Why do they chime at different pitches, Lady?" Mikayla asked.
    "Do they?" Haramis asked in surprise. "I never paid that much attention to the
    sound. What I want you to do with them is this-" She took both spheres into one
    hand and rotated them silently about each other first in one direction and then
    in the other. "You try it."
    She handed the spheres back to Mikayla. Side by side, they were the same width
    as Mikayla's palm, and when she tried to rotate them, they clinked against each
    other and made clanging noises as they moved. She tried to rotate them the other
    way, and promptly dropped one, which rolled off her lap and onto the floor with
    a loud clang. Mikayla winced at the sound and hastily crawled under the table to
    retrieve the sphere.
    When she resurfaced, Haramis was looking at her with an expression of long
    suffering. "Take them to your room and practice with them before you go to bed
    each night and when you wake up each morning. At least if you drop them on your
    bed, they won't make so much noise." She stood up, obviously preparing to retire
    for the night. "You need to practice with these until you can rotate them in
    either direction, in either hand, silently."
    This prospect seemed so unlikely to Mikayla that she didn't even think to ask
    why she should learn to do this until after Haramis had already left the room.
    Sighing, she put the spheres back into their box and went up the stairs to the
    bedroom Haramis had assigned her. She undressed and put on her nightgown,
    thinking that she might as well go to bed, since there was nothing else for her
    to do here anyway.
    She had thought that she was lonely as a child, before Fiolon had come to live
    at the Citadel, but then she had had her family, even if they did ignore her
    much of the time. And the servants at the Citadel had been friendly. Here only
    Enya, the housekeeper, spoke to her at all; if she passed any of the other
    servants in the hallways they pretended that she was invisible-or perhaps that
    they were. Uzun was willing to talk to her now, and she sat with him sometimes
    when Haramis was busy elsewhere in the evenings. But Uzun, being a harp,
    couldn't move at all. And Mikayla, by means of careful questioning interspersed
    with more general conversation, had discovered that he was indeed blind.
    Apparently he had fallen into his final illness quite suddenly, and Haramis had
    changed him into a harp because it was the first spell she could find that would
    ensure his continued consciousness. Mikayla had heard of blind harpers, and of
    course harps didn't have eyes, but most harps weren't sentient. Uzun had
    excellent hearing, even better than Mikayla's, which was quite good, and used
    that to compensate for his lack of sight and mobility. But still he knew only
    what happened within his hearing, in the Archimage's study and the hallway just
    outside it. Mikayla often wondered just how much he minded it. She was certain
    that it bothered him to some degree; she could sense a sort of sadness emanating
    from him even when his "voice" was most cheerful, and when he played songs just
    for himself, they tended to be melancholy.
    Sitting cross-legged on her bed, she took out the spheres again. She shook each
    one next to her ear, listening to the difference in tone and wondering how this
    was achieved. She wished that Fiolon was there to ask about them-or even to show
    them to. He would love these, she thought wistfully. I wish he were here now. I
    wonder how he's doing on his journey home.
    She held the spheres along the palm of her right hand and pulled the little
    sphere on the green ribbon free from her nightgown. She amused herself by
    striking it gently against the two larger spheres and listening to the sounds it
    made. She noticed that, for some reason, when she touched it to the top of the
    two larger spheres, it was reflected three times in each sphere, and when she
    held it beside them and looked down at the arrangement, there was a triangle
    between them, outlined in reflected spheres. At first she could see the palm of
    her hand through the triangle-after all, that was what was there-but after she
    stared at them for a minute her vision blurred, and as it cleared she could see
    Fiolon, curled up in a sleep sack next to a small fire. She was so startled that
    she dropped the spheres on her bed, and when she tried again, she couldn't get
    the vision back. But she fell asleep that night with a smile on her face,
    thinking that perhaps the spheres might have uses Haramis didn't suspect.
    Mikayla awakened shortly after dawn the next morning, and promptly picked up the
    spheres again. She was curious to see if she could summon up again the vision of
    Fiolon she had seen the night before. She rolled the spheres in her hand, a
    trick she found was getting easier-at least in the direction she was moving
    them-until she felt in her consciousness the faint beginnings of a trance state.
    The spheres in her hand grew warmer, almost so warm as to be uncomfortable. She
    touched the sphere that hung around her neck to the other two and looked at
    their conjunction.
    Sure enough, there was Fiolon, asleep in a sleep sack spread on the ground near
    the pair of tethered fronials. What a lay-abed, Mikayla thought in amusement. I
    wonder if I can wake him up. She gently shook the arrangement of spheres in her
    hands, causing them to chime softly.
    In her vision, Fiolon opened his eyes and sat up suddenly, reaching for his
    breast. Was his sphere chiming as well? Mikayla wished that she could hear as
    well as see what was happening around him.
    Well, perhaps she could. At least she could try. She felt herself reach out
    somehow, with her mind, and something seemed to stretch inside her head. Now she
    could hear the soft snorting noises of the fronials, and the rustle of tree
    branches, and even Fiolon's breathing, which was somewhat ragged, as if he had
    been wakened suddenly from a dream.
    "Fiolon?" she said softly, not sure whether she spoke aloud or not. "Can you
    hear me?"
    Fiolon twisted his head to look all about him. "Mika? Where are you?"
    This is wonderful.' Mikayla thought. Maybe the Archimage can't separate us after
    all.
    "I'm still stuck in this wretched Tower, Fio-where you left me!" she added
    accusingly. "But I think I've discovered something interesting. Look at the
    sphere around your neck."
    Fiolon looked all around him again, then shrugged and pulled the sphere out from
    under his tunic. It chimed as he moved it, and the small sphere in Mikayla's
    hand chimed as well, even though she was holding it perfectly still. The larger
    spheres touching it chimed in resonance with it. Fiolon held his sphere in front
    of his face, and his face appeared in Mikayla's small sphere, overlaying the
    scene of his surroundings. "I can see your face in this, Mika!" he said in
    surprise. "What is this, some sort of magic? Did the Archimage teach you this?"
    "No, she didn't," Mikayla snapped. "I do still have a brain, Fio; I didn't drop
    it in the river when she dragged us onto the lammergeiers. As for these being
    magic," she added, thinking it over, "I think she'd be very cross to hear you
    call this magic. Remember where we found these-they're probably some sort of
    device the Vanished Ones used to communicate with each other. Maybe they used
    them in the theater so that they could prompt an actor who forgot his lines."
    "You may be right," said Fiolon. "There were lots of different ones, but the two
    we took were a matched set. Maybe they are linked to each other. But if they
    were just made for use in the theater, how can we talk over this much distance?"
    "I have a theory about that," Mikayla explained. "Haramis gave me a box with two
    spheres of the same general type, but larger in size-I wish you were here to see
    them; they're exactly the same size, but their pitches are different, and when I
    asked Haramis why, she didn't seem to know or care-I don't think she ever even
    noticed. Do you suppose she can't hear differences in pitch?"
    "I've heard that there are some people like that," Fiolon said. "I think they
    call it tone-deaf. But she would hardly have made Master Uzun into a harp if she
    were tone-deaf-or if she weren't particularly fond of music. And the old songs
    all say that she was very musical."
    "Maybe the ability to hear pitch degrades when one gets old," Mikayla said.
    "She's very old, isn't she?"
    "A bit over two hundreds," Fiolon said. "She was about to be married when the
    last Great Threefold Conjunction occurred, and the next one is due in about four
    years from now. So she's probably between two hundred ten and two hundred
    fifteen."
    "But people don't live to be that old!" Mikayla protested. "Are you sure?"
    "She's not exactly an ordinary person," Fiolon said. "She's the Archimage. And
    I'm very sure that if she's the Haramis who was one of the triplet princesses
    who defeated the evil sorcerer Orogastus, then she's over two hundreds old."
    "I don't think I'd want to live that long," Mikayla said, shuddering. The
    spheres in her grasps chimed softly.
    "Why did she give the spheres to you?" Fiolon asked curiously.
    "She told me to practice rolling them around in my hand, but I haven't a clue as
    to why."
    "I'll bet it's to make your fingers more supple and give you more control,"
    Fiolon said. "You've seen the magical gestures the Oddlings make-like the one
    against the evil eye. She's probably going to be teaching you magic that
    requires you to use your hands and fingers very precisely."
    That made sense to Mikayla. "You may be right; it certainly seems reasonable.
    The Lady Archimage doesn't deign to explain anything to me or give reasons for
    anything she tells me to do." She sighed. "It's a pity she didn't choose you
    instead; you already use your hands more precisely than I'll ever be able to do.
    I can't even play a small lap harp."
    "But she chose you, Mikayla, and she has to have known what she was doing. After
    all, she is the Archimage."
    Mikayla shrugged. "She certainly does seem to do as she pleases. Look what she
    did to poor Uzun. But I'm glad that I can talk to you, even if we can't be
    together." She chewed on her lower lip. "I really miss you. Why did she have to
    separate us? I bet I'd learn what she wants me to much faster if you were
    learning it with me."
    Fiolon looked grave. "Does she know you're doing this? Talking to me through the
    spheres?"
    Mikayla shrugged. "I have no idea. It depends on just how omniscient she is, I
    guess. On the off chance that she doesn't, I don't think I'll tell her just yet,
    so I'd better get up and dressed before somebody comes looking for me. I'll talk
    to you again later, all right? I'm supposed to practice with these spheres when
    I wake up and just before I go to bed, so it'll probably be one of those times."
    "If you're sure that the Archimage won't object…" Fiolon said uncertainly.
    "I'm sure that if she does object, she'll let me know," Mikayla said. "Please,
    Fiolon; I need all the help I can get. I'd never have reasoned out why she
    wanted me to practice with the spheres- you can really help me, if you will."
    "Of course I will, Mika. As long as I can."
    Mikayla did make some effort to learn what Haramis wished to teach her, but she
    found it very difficult. When she was feeling charitable, she told herself that
    Haramis had never taught anyone before, in addition to having had no formal
    training herself, so it made sense that the "lessons" she gave were haphazard
    and not well organized. Mikayla coped by discussing everything with Fiolon, who
    seemed to have a much better intuitive understanding of magic and related
    subjects than she did, and if neither of them could work something out, she
    waited until Haramis had retired for the night and crept down to the study to
    ask Master Uzun. He almost always had the answer or could tell her where in the
    library to look it up. She became quite fond of the Oddling/harp and often went
    down to see him at night just to talk, even when she didn't have any specific
    questions. She was lonely, and she suspected that Uzun was much more lonely than
    she would ever be. Uzun told her a lot about what Haramis had been like as a
    child, although that information wasn't of much use now.
    "Surely she must have changed a great deal after she became Archimage," Mikayla
    said one night as she sat by the study hearth near Uzun. "The girl you describe
    isn't much like the old woman I have to deal with."
    "For a while," Uzun said thoughtfully, "she did change. She was softer, less
    sure of herself, less certain that her way was the right way to do everything.
    But, as time passed, and everyone she used to know died off, she started to
    change back."
    "And then some." Mikayla sighed. "By now, she's convinced that her way is the
    only way to do things. Her rules are the only ones that matter-and her rules
    aren't even consistent." She rested her chin on her drawn-up knees and stared
    into the fire. "She says that we shouldn't use technology, like the devices of
    the Vanished Ones, and that magic should be used only for important necessary
    purposes-and then she uses magic to send the dirty dishes back to the kitchen.
    But let her catch me and Fiolon using exactly the same magic to play catch and
    sharpen our skills, and she pitches a fit and sends him away, by fronial,
    through the snow, in the middle of winter. I don't think she even cared if he
    caught lung fever again, just as long as he didn't do it here and inconvenience
    her."
    There was the descending glissando of harp strings that was Uzun's equivalent of
    a sigh. "I know it's hard for you, Princess," he said, "but try to be patient
    with her. Fiolon did reach the Citadel safely, you know that."
    "Yes, thanks to the Lords of the Air," Mikayla said. "But I miss him so much! If
    Haramis didn't have to be parted from you, why did Fiolon have to leave?"
    "I think you had better go to bed now," Uzun said. "It's very late, and you do
    need some sleep."
    "In other words, you're not going to tell me." Mikayla got to her feet. She
    didn't bother looking for a candle; by now she knew every inch of hallway
    between her room and the study and could cover the distance silently in pitch
    blackness. "Good night, Uzun."
    "Good night, Princess."
    * * *
    But Mikayla's attempts to have patience with Haramis were somewhat less than
    successful. One particularly frustrating lesson a few days later was simply more
    than she could cope with. She hadn't had enough sleep the night before, and what
    sleep she had managed to get had been disturbed by nightmares. She had a
    headache, lunch had tasted funny, and she suspected that she was coming down
    with a cold. She felt generally wretched, and her lesson reflected it. She
    dropped her spheres at least five times before Haramis gave a long-suffering
    sigh and told her to put them away, and then she managed to knock over the
    scrying bowl. At the time it had contained only water, not the water-and-ink
    mixture they sometimes used, but Haramis had looked pained and made a fuss over
    mopping up the water.
    Haramis had a knack of making it clear, without having to use words, that she
    considered Mikayla badly raised, stupid, lazy, unmotivated, and totally unworthy
    to be Archimage. While this attitude did hurt, Mikayla could have tolerated it
    if it had meant that Haramis was willing to give up and send her home. But
    Haramis wasn't. She started, for at least the fiftieth time, her standard
    lecture on how lucky Mikayla was to be getting this training instead of being
    thrust into the job unprepared as she, Haramis, had been, and why couldn't
    Mikayla put a little effort into her lessons, and why was she being such a
    sulky, ungrateful brat…
    Mikayla could have given the entire speech herself from memory. She was doing
    her best, even if it wasn't very good today, and she was so angry that she
    wanted to throw every portable object in the room at Haramis. Since this,
    however, would probably have resulted in at least a modified magical duel, which
    was a bit more than Mikayla wanted to try today, she used words instead.
    "Before you came and kidnapped me," she screamed at the Archimage, "I had a
    life, and a family-even if they didn't pay much attention to me. I had a friend,
    and you brought me here and sent him away. You never asked if I wanted to be
    Archimage -you told me I was going to do it, you dragged me off to this horrid
    waste, and started making me learn all these stupid lessons regardless of
    whether I wanted to learn them or not!
    "Before you kidnapped me, I was free. I could go out if I wanted to, I could
    study what I wanted to. I don't know how you ever expect me to get any land
    sense here; I'm about as cut off from any contact with the land as I could
    possibly be. You won't even let me go outdoors, much less into the Mire or the
    Dylex or any region in this land where anything grows!
    "Maybe at home nobody cared much about me, but at least they weren't bothering
    me. They weren't hovering over me every minute of the day saying 'you must do
    this' and 'an Archimage mustn't do that.' Before I came here I was Mikayla; now
    I'm just 'Haramis in training.' I want my life back! I want my self back! I hate
    it here! I wish I were dead!
    "Every time I find some device of the Vanished Ones that's actually interesting
    or fun to play with, and something I could learn something from, you take it
    away and tell me that it's just a distraction from the study of pure magic which
    is the proper pursuit of the Archimage-which is incredibly hypocritical,
    considering that you've lived for centuries in a Tower that Orogastus put
    together with all the technology of the Vanished Ones he could amass! But the
    Archimage isn't supposed to use anything practical; the Archimage has to be one
    with the land. Well, I don't want to be one with the land! I want to be one with
    myself! I want my self back! I don't want to grow up to be like you!"
    By the end of this outburst Haramis was staring at her, with her mouth actually
    hanging open, apparently at a loss for words. Mikayla fled to her room and
    locked herself in before Haramis could decide on a course of action. She stayed
    locked in her room for the rest of the day, and no one called her for dinner.
    When she went down to breakfast the next morning, Haramis acted as if nothing at
    all had happened. She simply announced the lesson plans for the day as if she
    had never heard Mikayla speak a word against the idea of becoming Archimage.
    Mikayla had a sudden vision of years of this, of sitting across from Haramis at
    mealtimes, of listening to Haramis lecture endlessly on… Mikayla felt doomed.
    She wished that she could just curl up somewhere and die. But she was young and
    healthy. And besides, she didn't really want to be dead-she just didn't want to
    live this way.
    Chapter Eight
    Haramis looked at Mikayla, who sat across the breakfast table from her,
    listlessly stirring her cooked grains, and suppressed a sigh. It had been almost
    a year since Fiolon had left, and Mikayla was definitely still showing magical
    talent, although her powers had not increased as Haramis had hoped they would
    once Fiolon was out of the way and Mikayla wasn't wasting her time and energy
    with him. Haramis was uneasy. She had expected Mikayla to improve when Fiolon
    was gone, but the child had promptly developed a major case of the sulks. By
    now, it seemed to have sunk into her basic personality. Was this sullen girl
    really intended to be the next Archimage?
    It wasn't that she was rude anymore, Haramis reflected. Her behavior in that
    respect had improved markedly since Fiolon's departure. She was quiet, speaking
    only when spoken to; she was obedient, doing exactly as she was told. But the
    second she finished any appointed task, she slumped into the nearest chair or
    onto the nearest bench and stared at her lap. She appeared to have no real
    interest in magic, despite her undoubted aptitude for it, and worse yet, she
    seemed to have lost all interest in anything else in life. Of course Haramis
    knew that she herself wasn't interested in anything much outside of magic, but
    surely she wasn't so depressing about it. Uzun was more alive than Mikayla
    seemed at the moment. And he ate almost as much.
    "Mikayla." The girl raised a blank face from her bowl to meet Haramis's eyes.
    Haramis tried to think of something to say to rouse her. Unfortunately nothing
    came to her. "Did you practice with the spheres this morning?"
    "Yes, Lady." The tone was flat, and there was no change in the expression-or
    lack thereof-on the child's face.
    "How are you doing with them?"
    "Very well, Lady."
    This conversation is going nowhere fast, Haramis reflected grimly. I was young
    once, surely I ought to be able to communicate with her. "You'll have to show me
    later how you're coming along with them," she said, trying to sound pleasant and
    encouraging.
    "As you wish, Lady."
    Haramis gave up. "Eat your breakfast, child," she ordered. She strongly
    suspected that without a direct command, Mikayla would sit there, stirring the
    stuff and staring at it for the rest of the morning. She made a mental note to
    ask Enya to find out what foods Mikayla liked and serve them; she didn't want
    the girl to lose more weight than she already had.
    Wliat is there here that might interest her? Haramis thought back to her first
    vision of Mikayla, playing with Fiolon and the music boxes, wanting to take one
    apart to see how it worked. If she likes the music boxes, Haramis reflected,
    she'd probably be interested in other devices of the Vanished Ones. And goodness
    knows Orogastus left enough of them lying about here. I shoved them all into the
    storeroom on the lowest level when I came here, but some of them probably still
    work. I'd have to look at them first, however, because some of them are probably
    lethal. For Haramis, who was not at all fond of technology and hated rules that
    had to be reasoned with the head, instead of felt in soul and heart, this was an
    onerous chore.
    She'd probably love Orogastus's "magic mirror" as well, Haramis thought grimly,
    but I want to wait until her scrying is more reliable before I show that to her.
    I don't want her to think that Vanished Ones' devices can be an acceptable
    substitute for our own abilities.
    * * *
    Leaving Mikayla to finish her breakfast, Haramis went to her study. She sat in
    her chair and leaned Uzun against her shoulder, as if he were in truth the harp
    he was in seeming. She stroked her cheek against his satiny wood-a liberty that
    Uzun tolerated, realizing that something was seriously troubling his oldest
    friend.
    "Honestly, Uzun, I don't know what I'm going to do with that girl."
    "She does just what you tell her to," Uzun pointed out.
    "True." Haramis sighed. "It's the way she does it. If it weren't impossible, I'd
    think that I had gotten the wrong child, but she was definitely the one in my
    vision."
    "Are you sure that you're supposed to be training her?" Uzun asked. "The
    Archimage Binah didn't train you, and you've done a fine job."
    "You trained me, Uzun," Haramis pointed out. "I didn't come to the job
    head-blind. Mikayla had no magical training whatsoever before she came here."
    "She obviously has magical ability," Uzun said consolingly. "And she's learned a
    lot over the past two years. She used to come here in the evenings and tell me
    what she was learning, and she and Fiolon came to visit me every night from the
    time he could walk until he left."
    "They did?" Haramis said in surprise.
    "I guess they must have waited until you went to bed and wouldn't see them,"
    Uzun remarked. "I did wonder why they were up and about so late."
    "She does have talent, but she doesn't seem to want to use it," Haramis
    protested. "I was never like that-I was following you around demanding that you
    teach me before I could walk properly!"
    She slumped back into her chair, releasing Uzun suddenly and unexpectedly. He
    rocked a bit as he settled back onto his base. The harp let out a sound midway
    between a twang of strings and what would have been a gasp in a human.
    "Haramis?" Uzun said in inquiry, and then more urgently: "Haramis! What's
    wrong?"
    Haramis was unable to reply. She felt very strange. The entire left side of her
    body had a pins-and-needles sensation, as if she had slept on it wrong, and when
    she tried to move, she found that she couldn't. Even half her face seemed frozen
    in place. She felt very confused, as if something were seriously amiss, but she
    didn't know what. Was there some disaster with the land that she had failed to
    notice? Am I dying? she wondered. I can't be dying yet; Mikayla's not trained!
    It seemed forever that she lay slumped in the chair while Uzun vibrated
    agitatedly next to her, but in truth it couldn't have been more than the third
    part of an hour. Then whatever it was-some sort of spell?-wore off and she could
    move again. But why would anyone cast a spell against her? She had no enemies.
    She found she didn't want to think about this now. So she tried to calm Uzun and
    make light of the incident. "I'm sure it was nothing, Uzun; I probably slept at
    an odd angle last night, that's all." But it does remind me of the work yet to
    be done. She pulled herself out of her chair, trying to hide the effort it took.
    "I'm going to find Mikayla. I think it's time I taught her weather magic; it's
    an important part of the Archimage's work."
    "I think it's a bit soon for that, Lady." Uzun's protest was formal, and Haramis
    ignored it.
    "I'll be the judge of that, old friend." She smiled at him, momentarily
    forgetting that he could not see her, partly to take away the sting of her words
    and partly to hide how frightened she suddenly felt. I may not have as much time
    as I thought.
    "You always were stubborn." Uzun's voice rippled through a soft glissando along
    the strings. "Do as you wish; you will anyway."
    Haramis found Mikayla in her bedchamber, sitting cross-legged on her unmade bed
    with her back to the door, hunched over something in her hands.
    "What are you doing?" she inquired.
    Mikayla jumped, and two silver spheres fell onto the bed. Haramis walked over
    and picked them up. She thought that she saw Mikayla shove something into the
    neck of her tunic, but she wasn't sure, and anyway she had more important
    matters on her mind.
    She handed the spheres, which were unusually warm-no doubt from the warmth of
    Mikayla's hands, to her and said, "Put these away and come to the workroom. It's
    time for the next phase of your training."
    She turned on her heel and walked out of the room, ignoring the groan of
    inarticulate protest behind her.
    Mikayla dragged herself into the workroom just as Haramis was about to lose all
    patience and send Enya to fetch the girl. But she knew that scolding the child
    would only set her back up, so she forced herself to smile at her instead.
    "Come join me here at this table, child. Do you recognize it?"
    Mikayla slouched over to the side of the table and looked down at it. It was a
    variation of the traditional sand-table used for military battle planning, but
    instead of an expanse of blank sand and a collection of military counters, it
    used several different colors of sand, a few rocks, quite a bit of finely
    crushed white stone, and water. And, remarkably enough, it broke through
    Mikayla's indifference. For the first time in ages, Haramis saw a flash of
    interest in her face and intelligence in her eyes.
    "It's the Kingdom," Mikayla said promptly. "Here's the Greenmire"-she pointed to
    the green sand-"and here's the junction of the Golobar and the Lower Mutar
    rivers, where you" -she hesitated-"found me and Fiolon."
    Haramis wondered if the word Mikayla had censored was "kidnapped" and noted that
    she had not mentioned their Oddling companion at all, despite the fact that he
    had been with them at the time.
    "Here's the Blackmire," Mikayla continued, "and the Goldenmire, and the Citadel
    is on this rock here. And we're here." She pointed unerringly to the heap of
    crushed white stone that represented Mount Brom. "And Fiolon's here," she added
    defiantly, indicating the Citadel Rock.
    Haramis chose to ignore that last remark. "You are correct, Mikayla; this table
    is a model of the land. But it is not a toy or merely a map. It has a use. Can
    you guess what that is?"
    Mikayla started to roll her eyes, then quickly lowered them. "No, Lady," she
    replied, sinking back into her stupid-and-submissive act. Haramis wanted to
    shake her.
    "Stay here and study it, then, until you can think of a use for it," she said
    tartly. "I shall see you at luncheon." She turned on her heel and stalked out of
    the room.
    Five minutes later she was pacing the study, venting her exasperation to Uzun.
    "That child is going to drive me insane!" she complained, explaining what had
    transpired in the workroom.
    Uzun's strings rippled uneasily. "Maybe she already has. Are you saying that you
    left her alone and unsupervised and told her to play with the sand-table?"
    "Of course not," Haramis replied impatiently. "I told her to study it, not to
    touch it."
    "Did you forbid her to touch it?" Uzun asked anxiously.
    "No, I didn't. She'd probably mess it up just to spite me, the little wretch.
    Why are you so worried, Uzun?"
    "Because that table is one of the most powerful magical objects in this Tower,"
    Uzun said bluntly, "and despite the names you call her, the Princess Mikayla has
    a good mind and considerable natural magical ability."
    "Which she refuses to use," Haramis pointed out.
    "That could change at any time," Uzun warned. "I believe that you are seriously
    underestimating her. And it doesn't take much intelligence to discern that the
    table can be used for weather magic, especially if the bowls of water and the
    powdered rock you use for rain and snow are sitting next to it."
    "They're in the rack at the end of the table, where they belong," Haramis
    informed him. "Where else should they be? Without the activating spell they're
    just flakes of rock and drops of water."
    "New spells can be created to do the same job the old ones did," Uzun said
    sternly. "Magic is a matter of focus and intent, and Mikayla does have both."
    "You worry too much, old friend." Haramis smiled fondly, moving to his side to
    stroke the smooth wood of his frame.
    "Indeed?" Uzun said in a soft ripple, sounding almost amused. "Did you intend
    for it to be raining here today?"
    Haramis whirled and dashed to the study window. Uzun was right; a thin stream of
    rain was falling precisely into the center of the courtyard, and the snow was
    melting in a circle around where the rain fell. She heard the harp chuckling
    behind her as she cursed under her breath and ran for the workroom, where she
    arrived with a stitch in her side and difficulty breathing.
    "Stop that!" she gasped.
    Mikayla looked up from the table, where she was carefully dripping water off of
    her little fingertip onto the image of Mount Brom. "I believe that I've figured
    out what this table is used for, Lady," she said calmly. "It appears to work
    quite well for weather witching."
    Haramis felt a sharp stabbing pain in her head and forced herself not to clutch
    at it. Bad enough to be gasping for breath without displaying further signs of
    weakness. "I told you to study the table, not to touch it or play with it!" she
    snapped. "I told you it was not a toy."
    Mikayla looked bewildered. "But if it were dangerous, Lady, surely you would not
    have left me alone with it. And how was I supposed to study it without touching
    it? One learns about things by experimentation, by forming a theory, testing the
    theory, and creating a new theory if the first one doesn't work, until one has a
    model that accurately represents reality-or at least the portions of it that one
    needs to deal with. And you need a bigger sand-table," she added. "This one
    doesn't have room for Labornok or Var, and surely Labornok at least is your
    responsibility; the kingdoms have been united for almost two hundreds now."
    Haramis's head felt as though it were about to split open, and she did not feel
    up to debating with Mikayla or anyone else her alleged responsibility to the
    inhabitants of a country that had attacked her home, violently murdered her
    parents and everyone else they could get their hands on, and tried to do the
    same to her. Even if the events in question had occurred a long time ago, in
    Haramis's memory they were as clear as if they had happened last week. I must be
    getting old, she thought, If I can remember long-ago events more clearly than
    recent ones. Aloud she said simply, "Go and wash for dinner, Mikayla. I shall
    see you at the table."
    As she left the room to find some willow-bark tea for her headache, she heard
    Mikayla's voice behind her.
    "But it's only lunchtime."
    After lunch, Haramis gave Mikayla an old Chronicle on the history of Ruwenda to
    read, hoping that this would at least keep the girl out of trouble for the rest
    of the day. She felt much too tired to deal with her.
    Haramis went to her room, feeling a need to be by herself for a while, although
    she was trying hard not to think of the strange episode of that morning. She lay
    down on her bed, planning to rest just for an hour or two, but her weariness
    overcame her and she didn't stir until Enya came to see why she hadn't come down
    for dinner.
    "Dinner?" Haramis sat up and pushed her hair out of her face. "Is it dinnertime
    already?" She looked out her windows and was surprised to see that it was dark.
    "I must have fallen asleep."
    "You certainly did, Lady," Enya replied. "I already fed Princess Mikayla, and
    she's sitting talking with Master Uzun, so you don't need to worry about her.
    Why don't you just stay here in your room and let me bring you a tray? You look
    as though you could use the rest."
    "Thank you, Enya," Haramis said. "I am a bit tired and a tray in my room sounds
    like a good idea."
    As soon as Enya left, Haramis dragged herself out of bed and went to look in her
    mirror. Enya was correct. Obviously she had overtired herself, for the glamour
    that she usually maintained automatically, the spell that made people see what
    she wished them to see when they looked at her, was gone. The face that stared
    back at her was her true face, pale and gaunt and old. "I'd better stay in my
    room until I get my strength back," she muttered to herself. "Uzun can't see me,
    and Enya knows what I am. But it's a bit soon to have to explain this to
    Mikayla."
    Haramis had forgotten that Mikayla had seen her earlier in the day. In fact,
    Mikayla had been staring at Haramis all through lunch, and Haramis hadn't even
    noticed. And now Mikayla was having a long talk with Uzun.
    "Is the Lady Haramis ill, Uzun?" she asked him. "She didn't look well at lunch,
    and she didn't come down for dinner at all. Enya says she's just tired, but she
    looked a lot worse than tired today."
    "What do you mean by 'worse than tired'?" Uzun asked.
    Mikayla sighed. "I wish you could see," she said. "Usually she looks sort of
    ageless-I mean her hair is white, but she doesn't really look old."
    Uzun sighed, a faint ripple of harp strings. "She used to have black hair when
    she was a girl, but when she became Archimage she changed the color to white,
    and she was only about two decades old then, not old enough for white hair to be
    natural. She made herself look older then, too-as if she were four decades old
    or so-and then she kept that appearance for as long as I could still see her. I
    don't know if her appearance changed after I became a harp…"
    "It didn't," Mikayla said. "She looked like that every time I saw her-until
    today. Today her hair was a sort of grayish yellow and she looked really old.
    And her face was thin and sort of sunken. Was she using a spell to change her
    appearance all those years?"
    "A very minor one," Uzun said. "Properly it's called a glamour, not a spell."
    "Oh, I know that one!" Mikayla said. "I used a variation of it when I was very
    small. That's the spell you use to keep people from noticing you when you don't
    want them to see what you're doing, like when you want to go play outdoors and
    don't want to get stopped on your way out of the castle. Or if you're in a room
    and someone you don't want to see you comes in-you just sit very still and think
    'I am not here' and they don't see you."
    "Sounds like the same basic principle," Uzun agreed.
    "Are you saying I could have used it to make it appear that I was neatly dressed
    when my clothes were streaked with mud and my braids were coming apart?" Mikayla
    asked. "I should haive learned that version, too; it would have saved me a lot
    of scoldings."
    Uzun chuckled. "A glamour can be used for that, yes. Bull I suspect that in your
    case, Princess, the scoldings were more of a minor nuisance than a serious
    problem, so you never bothered to learn to use a glamour in that way."
    Mikayla giggled. "You're right. It always seemed so stupid to me, the idea that
    I should look clean and beautiful at all times. If you go out in the swamps, you
    get muddy, and that's all there: is to it. And nobody really cared what I looked
    like unless it was some sort of special occasion, and then I let the maids dress
    me properly and stayed clean and neat until it was over."
    She frowned, considering how this would apply to Haramis. "So if the Lady
    Haramis has been maintaining a glamour to keeep her appearance the same for
    decades and decades, and now all of a sudden the glamour is gone, either she's
    suddenly stopped caring, or-or she's sick and has no energy to maintain it?"
    "I'm afraid you are right," Uzun said. "She had some sort of seizure while she
    was sitting with me this morning-for a while she couldn't talk or move. She said
    it was nothing, and them I pointed out to her that it was raining and she left
    rather abruptly."
    "She told me to figure out what the table was used for," Mikayla said with mock
    innocence, "as if it weren't perfectly obvious as soon as I looked at it. But
    it's strange," she continued, "it's not just something that you can use as a
    tool to maike weather-although you can certainly do that quite easily with it.
    When I touch it, it's as if I can feel the land through it, even though it's
    just a small model of the true land."
    " 'Feel the land'?" Uzun said encouragingly. "What do you mean by that?"
    "Don't you know?" Mikayla asked in surprise. "The land is alive, Uzun, and all
    of it fits together; anytime one thing changes, everything around it does as
    well."
    "And you can sense that," Uzun said. "How long have you been able to feel the
    land?"
    Mikayla shrugged. "All my life, I guess. As long as I can remember, anyway-it
    was always there in the background. It just got a lot stronger when I touched
    the table, that's all. Does Haramis use the table to tell her what's happening
    in the land? Is that why she stays here all the time, instead of traveling about
    the land?"
    "Perhaps it is," Uzun replied. "She's never said."
    "But this morning she didn't notice it was raining until you told her?" Mikayla
    asked. "That doesn't sound good."
    "She was somewhat distracted," Uzun said, adding smugly, "and I do have
    excellent hearing. Don't worry about it, child; she'll probably be fine in the
    morning."
    Chapter Nine
    With Haramis spending the evening in bed, Mikayla took advantage of the
    opportunity. She went to her room, picked up the box with the spheres that
    Haramis still had her practicing with, and went to the workroom.
    While she hadn't been able to contact Fiolon every night and morning, over the
    past year she had done it often enough so that it was quite easy to do by now.
    It was even getting fairly easy to rotate the spheres in each hand the way
    Haramis wanted her to- Mikayla had been practicing that, too. But tonight she
    twirled them only long enough to build up enough power to establish the link.
    "Fio," she whispered excitedly when she saw his face, "I've got something
    terrific to show you. Are you someplace alone?"
    Fio nodded. "I'm in our old playroom," he said. "Nobody is going to bother me
    here." He frowned for a moment. "In fact, without you here, everyone is just
    ignoring me. It's pretty lonely."
    "I'm sorry," Mikayla said sincerely. "I miss you, too. I wish you were here and
    I could share this with you firsthand, instead of through the spheres."
    "Share what?" Fiolon craned his neck, looking curious.
    "Look." Mikayla held the spheres over the table, moving them around so that he'd
    get a good view.
    "It's Ruwenda!" Fiolon said at once. "And it's better than any map I've ever
    seen. If I get ink and parchment, can you hold the spheres long enough for me to
    copy it?"
    "That shouldn't be a problem," Mikayla replied. "Haramis and the servants have
    gone to bed, and Uzun isn't exactly ambulatory. We've got the rest of the night
    if we need it. Get what you need, and contact me with your sphere when you're
    ready."
    "Can I reach you with just mine?" Fiolon asked. "We've never tried that."
    "We won't know until we do," Mikayla pointed out. "If I don't hear from you in a
    candlemark, I'll bespeak you again. But I'm sure you can do it; you're a much
    better natural magician than I am."
    Fiolon smiled, breaking the contact without further comment. Mikayla sat by the
    window, manipulating the spheres and looking down into the courtyard. She
    frowned when she noticed what her earlier rain had done. The snow had melted
    over a large expanse of the courtyard, but it had still been wet when darkness
    fell and the temperature dropped. Now the courtyard was a sheet of ice,
    glistening in the moonlight. "I'd better do something about that," she said to
    herself, "or we'll have folk sliding all over the place and breaking bones come
    morning." She sighed. "I really shouldn't have made it rain in the first place;
    it was awfully petty to meddle with the weather just to annoy Haramis."
    She went back to the sand-table and studied the bowls at the end of it. She
    pressed a fist idly into the crushed white rock. It made a sound as it moved
    under her knuckles, the sound of footsteps in snow. Of course! she realized. The
    water is rain and this is snow! I should have figured that out this morning;
    after all it is what the mountains are made of.
    She felt a warmth inside her head and heard Fiolon's voice. "Mikayla, can you
    hear me?"
    "Yes, I can," she answered, bringing the sphere up to her face so she could see
    him. "Here, I'll hold the sphere so you can see the table, and you can draw it
    while I work."
    "Work?" Fio asked.
    "Weather witching," she explained briefly, ignoring Fiolon's "Oh, of course."
    She grinned. "Haramis left me here alone this morning with orders to figure out
    what the table was used for. Obviously she thought it would take me all day-if I
    ever figured it out. She came back here in a big hurry when I made it start
    raining in the courtyard!"
    "Are you sure it wasn't coincidence?" Fiolon asked, falling into their common
    argument/counterargument pattern. "Doesn't it usually rain there in the spring?"
    "Haramis certainly seemed sure enough when she was yelling at me. It's the first
    time I've ever seen her out of breath. Serves her right, though; she shouldn't
    treat me like an idiot."
    Fiolon opened his mouth, then closed it. Mikayla figured that he had decided not
    to give her his opinion of her intelligence. "Besides," she added, "it never
    rains here, even in the summer-it always snows."
    "So what is this work that you are doing now?"
    "Minor repairs. When I made it rain this morning, it melted a lot of the snow,
    and now the courtyard is a sheet of ice."
    "So are you going to melt the ice?"
    "It's after dark here, Fiolon, and the temperature has dropped. Melting the ice
    would be working against nature."
    "You're right," Fiolon said, still sketching busily. "I should have thought of
    that. And if you make it hot enough to melt ice in the middle of the night,
    you'll probably cause flooding someplace."
    "Or avalanches," Mikayla agreed. "No, I think the best thing to do now is to
    simply put a thick layer of snow over the ice. That way everyone will be wading
    through snow and the snow should help keep them from slipping. Then, if it gets
    a bit warmer naturally in a day or two, I can get Haramis to show me how to melt
    the ice enough to dry the courtyard." She looked at the various bowls placed
    around the table. "Besides, I'm not sure what one uses to produce heat in a
    location-
    "A torch?" Fiolon suggested.
    "Maybe. But I'm pretty sure that this crushed marble stuff is for making
    snow-and if it isn't, I'll find out quickly."
    "Try it, then," Fiolon said, "but do be careful. Is it all right if I watch? I
    want to see how it works."
    "Certainly." Mikayla picked up a small handful of the granules of white stone
    and spilled them carefully from her hand onto the Tower on the table,
    concentrating on snow. She visualized snow falling softly onto the Tower and its
    surroundings, gently covering the ice in the courtyard, frosting the roof and
    the balconies. She seemed to float in midair just outside the Tower watching the
    snow drift around her. It was a very strange feeling, one she had never
    experienced before. As she concentrated further she felt as if she were growing
    smaller, shrinking to snowflake size, becoming just another crystal falling
    slowly through the night, picking up moisture and converting it to lacy patterns
    of snowflake…
    The pale light of dawn woke her. She was lying on the floor, next to the table,
    and every muscle in her body was stiff and sore. Why am I sleeping on the floor
    when I have a perfectly good bed? she wondered. Then her memories of last night
    returned, and she jumped to her feet, wincing as her body protested. She hurried
    to the window and looked out.
    "I did it!" she exclaimed in delight. The courtyard was covered with snow, and
    looking at the railing of the nearest balcony showed her that it was almost
    exactly the depth she had planned. She wondered if it had been the proper depth
    when she fell asleep and the spell had stopped then or if it had continued while
    she slept until it reached the desired amount. Maybe Haramis would tell her, if
    Haramis was in a good mood this morning. And Haramis would probably be in a much
    better mood if Mikayla was found in her room practicing with the spheres when it
    was time for breakfast.
    Mikayla tiptoed all the way to her room, changed into her night robe, got into
    bed and thrashed around to give it a properly slept-in look, and reached for the
    box containing the spheres. But as she reached out her arm she suddenly became
    aware of how tired she was. "It won't hurt to sleep for a little bit longer,"
    she said to herself. "It's still early. And cold." She let her arm drop to her
    side, snuggled under the covers, and fell asleep again almost instantly.
    When she woke again the sun was streaming through her window -she had forgotten
    to close the curtains. "Oh, no," she said, scrambling out of bed and into the
    clothing nearest to hand. "I'm late for breakfast!" Pausing only long enough to
    run a comb through her hair, she ran for the dining room, slowing down to a walk
    as she approached it. Her mother had told her that a princess never ran, and she
    had said it often enough that Mikayla had developed the habit of entering a room
    at a ladylike pace, regardless of what her speed had been as she came down the
    hall.
    Breakfast was laid out on the sideboard, but there was only one plate. Haramis
    must have eaten earlier, Mikayla thought. I only hope she's not too angry at me
    for oversleeping. Mikayla made a hasty breakfast of cold toast and ladu-fruit
    cider that had been hot but was now room temperature. Then she went looking for
    Haramis.
    She tried the study first, but when she poked her head through the door, Uzun
    sat there alone in his place at the side of the room. "Who's there?" the harp
    strings sang softly.
    "It's Mikayla," she replied. "Good morning, Uzun." She had grown very fond of
    the Odd! ing/harp, especially since Fiolon had left. Before that, Uzun had
    seemed more Fiolon's friend than hers, as if he simply tolerated Mikayla because
    Fiolon liked her. But after Fiolon's departure, Mikayla had continued to spend
    time with Uzun, who was much more sympathetic and easier to talk to than
    Haramis.
    Mikayla thought it rather cruel of Haramis to have stuck Uzun in his present
    form. It must certainly be a trial for him to be blind. Even if he had agreed to
    this transformation, it still seemed to Mikayla that it was selfish of Haramis
    to keep him bound like this.
    "Good morning, Princess Mikayla," Uzun said politely. "Did you sleep well?"
    In her mind Mikayla could still hear her mother's frequent admonition: "That's a
    greeting, daughter, not a question." She hadn't realized until she came here
    just how much of her mother's instruction she had absorbed. Back when she had
    been living at the Citadel, she-and everyone who knew her-would have sworn that
    her mother's words affected Mikayla no more than rain did a waterbird.
    Now she found herself replying automatically. "Yes, thank you, Uzun. And you?"
    She caught herself. "I'm sorry, I don't know whether you sleep or not. But if
    you do, I hope that you slept well."
    "I'm not sure whether I sleep or not, either, Princess," the harp replied. "If
    you ever come in and have to wake me up, then we'll both know. But I'm fairly
    sure I don't dream."
    "Do you miss it?" Mikayla asked curiously.
    "Yes." The reply was as bleak as a harp could sound.
    Mikayla bit her lip. I wish I weren't always hurting his feelings, she thought.
    I wish I were more like my sisters. I wish I were home with my mother. Aloud she
    said only "I'm sorry." After all, there wasn't much more she could say, and
    Mikayla had no doubt of her ability to make a bad situation worse if she kept
    talking. Time to change the subject.
    "Do you know where the Lady is this morning, Uzun?"
    "No." The harp sighed. "She didn't come in to say good morning today."
    "That's odd," Mikayla said. "It looks as though she ate breakfast."
    "Ring the bell, child," Uzun said briskly. "Ask Enya what has happened."
    Enya arrived a few minutes later. Uzun was demanding to know Haramis's
    whereabouts before the housekeeper was even though the doorway.
    He may be blind, but at least he has excellent hearing, Mikayla thought. I think
    he heard her coming at least half a minute before I did.
    "She's gone," Enya explained. "One minute she was sitting there eating breakfast
    and staring into space-you know the way she does, Princess-and the next minute
    she just left her food, went and got her cloak, and flew off on one of those
    great birds of hers."
    "Where did she go?" Uzun asked. "Didn't she say?"
    "Well, Master Uzun," Enya replied uneasily, "it's not my place to question her
    comings and goings, and I really shouldn't say…"
    The harp strings jangled angrily, and Enya twisted her apron nervously between
    her hands. "She flew south, maybe toward the Citadel. I don't know for sure."
    Mikayla gasped in horror, filled with sudden foreboding. "Fiolon!" she said,
    running full tilt from the room. She didn't stop until she was in her bedchamber
    with the door bolted. She grabbed for the box and spilled the spheres into her
    hand. They almost seemed to twirl of their own accord, and the power came almost
    instantly as she touched the sphere she wore to them. This time hearing, not
    sight, was the first sense she picked up. No doubt Fiolon's sphere was tucked
    safely inside his shirt, but the argument going on around him was clearly
    audible.
    * * *
    "You must be mistaken, my lady Archimage," the Queen was saying with cold
    certainty. "My daughter may be a bit of a hoyden, but she is not immoral. Nor is
    my sister's son."
    "She is mistaken," Fiolon said angrily. "I never touched Mikayla that way. We
    were going to be betrothed last year and then married. I certainly had no reason
    to wish to dishonor my future wife."
    "She is not your future wife!" Haramis snapped angrily.
    "During the period of time you are referring to, my lady," Fiolon replied, "I
    can assure you that we considered her as such. I love Mikayla, I shall always
    love Mikayla, regardless of what you do to her, and I would never have done
    anything to harm her."
    "This is ludicrous," the King protested feebly. "Look at him- they're little
    more than children. And," he added with more firmness, "for most of the past two
    years Mikayla has been living with you. They couldn't have lain together unless
    you were lax about chaperoning them."
    "What?" Mikayla gasped aloud.
    Apparently Fiolon could hear her, but fortunately his urgent "Hush!" was covered
    by the adults' voices.
    But I'm not old enough to lie with anyone, Mikayla thought. I remember when my
    older sisters reached marriageable age, and I'm not that mature yet-which is
    odd; they were about my age when it happened to them. Is Haramis doing something
    to keep me a child? No, she couldn't be; if she were, she'd realize that what
    she's saying about me and Fiolon is nonsense. Maybe it's a side effect of
    studying magic…
    "And if they were not physically intimate," Haramis snapped, "just how do you
    explain the fact that they're bonded together like this?"
    "What do you mean by bonded?" the Queen asked.
    "Linked, connected, permanently in contact with each other," Haramis said
    impatiently. "Why do you think you have snow all over the Citadel Knoll?"
    "Oh, no!" Mikayla whispered.
    "What does the snow have to do with this?" The King sounded totally confused.
    "Ask the boy," Haramis said coldly.
    "It was an accident," Fiolon said quietly. "I didn't mean to make it snow here.
    I was watching Mikayla, who was making it snow at the Lady's Tower, and we both
    fell asleep, and somehow the weather spell got duplicated here."
    "What do you mean 'Mikayla was making it snow'?" Haramis asked sharply. "She
    doesn't know how to make it snow!"
    "Lady," Fiolon said politely, "if you look at the table, it's really pretty
    obvious how to make it snow. She was doing it because the rain she made earlier
    in the day had left the courtyard still wet at dark, and it froze solid. She
    didn't want the servants falling down and getting hurt when they started work in
    the morning."
    "Wouldn't melting the ice have been simpler?" the King asked. "And how does
    putting a layer of snow over it help?"
    "It would take a lot of energy to melt ice in the mountains at night," Fiolon
    explained. "It's cold and dark, so you can't use the sun to help-and the moons
    aren't strong enough. And if you did produce enough energy to melt ice in a cold
    stone courtyard near the top of a mountain, you'd have melted enough of the
    surrounding snow to produce at least an avalanche, if not flooding, farther
    downhill. As for putting snow on top of ice, when you're stepping into snow, it
    helps hold your legs where you put them; and if you do fall, you fall on
    something softer than ice."
    "Hmm," Haramis said thoughtfully. "And did Mikayla work all of this out for
    herself? Or did you help her?"
    "We talked about it, deciding what would be best to do," Fiolon said. "We're
    used to working as a team. But most of it was Mikayla; she's generally the one
    who comes up with the original ideas. My part is usually to make sure she
    doesn't charge headlong into something without thinking it through. And we knew
    how snow over ice works from all the camping we did in the mountains three years
    ago."
    "I didn't realize you'd ever seen snow before," Haramis remarked idly. She
    sounded much calmer now.
    Fiolon, however, was suddenly feeling anything but calm. "Are you saying, Lady,"
    he said through clenched teeth, "that when you handed me two fronials and a sack
    of supplies and sent me back here, on a journey that runs through snowy
    mountains for at least four days, you thought I knew nothing about snow?"
    "I didn't really think of it one way or the other," Haramis said. "Why?"
    "Lords Above!" Fiolon exclaimed angrily. "You really don't have any regard for
    life or people-or anything except your own convenience! If I didn't know how to
    make camp in snow, I would have died-didn't that ever occur to you? Or is that
    what you wanted-to be sure that Mikayla and I were separated! I warn you, Lady;
    if you kill me, I'll come back and haunt you, and I'll be right by Mikayla's
    side as long as she lives-and afterward!"
    Haramis's voice was long-suffering as she addressed the King and Queen. "I
    realize that everyone considered these two children surplus, but it would have
    been convenient if someone could have spent a little time civilizing them. I
    have never encountered such poor manners before in my life."
    "Don't blame them," Fiolon snapped. "They did teach us manners. But being
    treated as things instead of people tends to bring out the worst in us; and you,
    Lady, definitely treat people as things. Look what you did to Uzun!"
    "Uzun is not the subject of this discussion; you and Mikayla are." Mikayla could
    hear Haramis's footsteps and guessed that the Lady was pacing over to the
    window. She reached out with her mind and added sight to the link with Fiolon.
    He was watching Haramis, who was glaring out the window at the snow. The
    glamour, Mikayla noted, was back; Haramis looked the same as she always had. But
    now Mikayla knew it was an illusion.
    After several minutes of staring out the window, Haramis turned her attention
    back to Fiolon. "I've taken care of your little snowstorm," she informed him.
    "It will all melt within a few hours. As for your bond with Mikayla"-she looked
    around the room, then walked over to a display of swords on the wall and took
    one down-"I'm going to sever it. I suggest that you cooperate."
    "What happens if we don't?" Fiolon asked. Mikayla could feel a great deal of
    determination that the bond be kept intact. She wasn't sure how much was hers
    and how much his, but a lot of it was in his voice.
    Haramis's lips thinned in annoyance. "I'll break the bond anyway, I'll keep
    breaking it if you try to reestablish it, and I'll have you sent back to Var,
    assigned to the Royal Navy, and sent as far out to sea as possible. Nobody can
    maintain a bond that far away, especially across running water." She swept the
    sword in an arc through the air, with the sharp edge pointing down, several feet
    in front of Fiolon's body. Fiolon and Mikayla cried out together in pain, and
    the bond broke.
    Chapter Ten
    The next thing Mikayla knew, she was lying on her side on top of her bed, curled
    up in a ball and holding her stomach, which felt as if someone had set fire to
    the front of her tunic. Her head burned, too, from the center of her forehead up
    across the top of her head. She heard a whimpering sound, and after a few
    minutes she realized that she was the one making it. She bit her lip and forced
    herself to be silent, but the pain continued. She tried to straighten out, but
    that hurt even worse, so she lay curled up on her side and waited for it to go
    away. It was still there when she lost consciousness again.
    Mikayla woke again when someone started pounding on her door. Go away, she
    thought. I don't want to be awake. She tried to ignore the noise and go back to
    sleep.
    "Princess Mikayla." Enya's voice was full of concern. "Are you all right?"
    "I'm fine," Mikayla called, although her voice came out as rather a croak.
    "It's time for lunch. Don't you want any?"
    The thought of food was truly repugnant at the moment-in fact Mikayla didn't
    think she'd ever want to eat again in her life. "Thank you, Enya, but I'm really
    not hungry. Tell the Lady that I'm busy studying and don't want to stop for
    lunch."
    "She's not back yet," Enya replied. "Do you know where she is?"
    "Probably still at the Citadel," Mikayla replied, trying to figure out times
    involved. It had been midmorning when she had been watching Haramis, and now
    Enya said it was lunchtime…
    So I've only been unconscious for a couple of hours-on and off. Aloud she said,
    "If she's not back by dinnertime, don't bother to cook anything-I'll raid the
    kitchen when I take a break." She hoped her voice sounded as if she were
    absorbed in her studies, rather than in pain.
    Apparently Enya didn't notice anything wrong, for she simply said, "As you wish,
    Princess. Oh, and Master Uzun would like to see you at your convenience."
    "Thank you, Enya. I'll go see him presently." When I can manage advanced
    functions like standing up and walking. She heard the housekeeper's footsteps
    move away, and then fell asleep again.
    When she next woke, it was dark outside and the only light in her room came from
    the embers of the fire, which had died down to almost nothing. It was cold in
    the room, despite the warm air coming from the grille by the bed. Mikayla was
    cold, too; she hadn't even had the energy to pull a blanket over her earlier.
    Cautiously she straightened her body. It was stiff from long hours in one tense
    position, but the worst of the pain was gone. Now she simply had a stomachache
    and an empty feeling inside. "I'm going to get up," she told herself, as if
    saying it aloud would make it happen, "and I'm going to go to the library and
    find the description of that spell Haramis used on us. And I'm going to find out
    how to reverse it." She moved slowly over to the edge of the bed, then slid over
    the side of the mattress to a standing position on the floor, still holding on
    to the bed. After a moment, when she was reasonably sure that her legs would
    support her, she picked up the candle from her table, lit it with a word of
    command, and headed toward the door.
    She still felt weak and dizzy, so it took her a few minutes to get the door
    unbolted, but she finally managed it. Then she headed for the library.
    As she passed the study there was a commanding ripple of the harp's strings.
    "Mikayla!"
    Oh, that's right, Uzun wanted to see me. She poked her head into the study,
    which was also dark, except for the fire. The fire in the study was always kept
    burning so that the temperature would stay the same for Uzun. Harps, whether
    sentient or not, did not react well to changes in temperature. Uzun had
    explained this to Mikayla in great and highly technical detail during one of
    their late-night talks.
    "Come in and sit down, child-or fall down, whichever is easier," Uzun said
    sympathetically. "And tell me what in the name of the Lords of the Air is going
    on around here! Haramis hasn't returned; you're a wreck-what happened?"
    Mikayla set her candle down carefully on the table and dropped her body a good
    deal less carefully into the chair next to it. In fact, she missed the chair and
    wound up on the floor in front of it. She leaned back against the seat of the
    chair and closed her eyes. It was too much work to move anymore.
    "I'm not sure exactly what happened myself, Uzun," she said, "but, Lords, how I
    hurt!"
    "I know about the rain yesterday," Uzun prompted her. "Did you do the snow last
    night as well?"
    "Yes," Mikayla said dully. "I didn't want the servants to slip on the ice and
    get hurt. Nobody did, did they?"
    "Not to my knowledge," Uzun said. "Go on."
    "When I was making it snow, I was linked to Fiolon." Mikayla started to cry. "He
    was sketching the sand-table, because it's better than any of the maps we have.
    Even if I'm stuck here, he still ought to be allowed to go exploring, don't you
    think?"
    "I don't see why not," Uzun replied, "as long as he doesn't go into the Mazy
    Mire alone or do something equally dangerous."
    "He doesn't do dangerous things," Mikayla said, sniffling. "I'm the reckless
    one, I'm the one who does stupid things-he's the one who gets us out of trouble
    when I get us into it."
    "A valuable quality in a friend," Uzun said gravely.
    "Yes." Mikayla started crying again, this time mostly from anger. "But Haramis
    doesn't see it that way. Do you believe that she actually went to my parents and
    accused Fiolon and me of immoral behavior!"
    "Why ever would she think that?"
    "Just because it snowed at the Citadel when I made it snow here. She said that
    Fiolon and I were bonded, and she was going to break the bond, and then she took
    a sword off the wall, and…" Mikayla paused. "I'm not sure exactly what she did
    next; it hurt and I fainted. And I don't know what she did to Fiolon and I'm
    worried about him."
    "The spell you're describing is fairly simple," Uzun said. "You swing a sword
    through the space between the two people, which snaps the bond temporarily, then
    you visualize a flame burning the cord or cords that bound them together."
    "That would certainly explain the way I feel," Mikayla said. "I hurt from the
    top of my head down to my stomach."
    "But nothing below the waist hurts?" Uzun asked.
    "No. Why should it?" Mikayla asked in bewilderment. "What does hurt is more than
    enough."
    "The cords attach to different points on your body depending on the type of bond
    you have," Uzun explained. "If you and Fiolon had been married, for example, the
    pain would go down as far as your legs. Since it stops at the waist, obviously
    Haramis is mistaken."
    "Fiolon told her that before she started swinging that sword around," Mikayla
    said. "But would she listen? No. She never listens!"
    "It's not her strongest skill," Uzun agreed. "But I'm worried about her."
    "Because she's not back already?"
    "Partly that," Uzun admitted, "but she doesn't always account to me for her
    comings and goings. No, I feel that there is something wrong with her. She had
    some sort of seizure yesterday morning before your lesson, and then she flew off
    to the Citadel when she probably should have rested for at least a few days."
    "And it's not as if she needed to do anything about the snow at the Citadel,"
    Mikayla pointed out. "Even in the middle of winter, it would have all melted by
    midafternoon, and it's late spring now."
    "She does have a bit of a temper," Uzun admitted, "and she's used to doing
    things her own way." He sighed. "Princess, do you feel well enough to try to
    scry for her and see if she's all right?"
    "I don't know," Mikayla said slowly. "I guess I can try. But I really do feel
    sick-sort of empty and hollow inside."
    "Please try," Uzun pleaded, "for my sake, if not for hers. If I could still
    scry, I'd do it myself."
    "For your sake, Uzun, I'll try it." Mikayla pulled the small sphere out of the
    front of her tunic. I don't have the energy to go find a proper scrying bowl,
    and if I can scry at all, I can do it with this. "I still think it was rotten of
    her to make you blind."
    For the first time, Uzun didn't argue with her or automatically leap to
    Haramis's defense. He just sat there quietly while Mikayla stared into the
    sphere, focusing beyond the reflected firelight.
    She was standing in the playroom in the Citadel's old tower, staring out the
    window toward Mount Brom. It was dark, except for a candle on the floor behind
    her, and the sound of rain pouring down outside the window explained why there
    was nothing much to see outside. And there was only one person who was likely to
    be in the playroom.
    "Fiolon?" she whispered.
    "Mikayla?" Fiolon's voice whispered back. "Are you all right?"
    Suddenly she was fine. Her head didn't hurt, her stomach didn't hurt, and the
    empty feeling inside was gone-except for the fact that now she was hungry and
    very much aware of the fact that she hadn't eaten anything since breakfast.
    "Yes, I'm all right now," she said. "How about you?"
    "It just stopped hurting," he replied. "Does this mean that we've reestablished
    our bond?"
    "I think so," she said, turning to the harp. "Uzun, all of a sudden Fiolon and I
    don't hurt anymore. Does this mean that our bond is back?"
    "Yes, it does," Uzun answered.
    "Hey! I can hear him!" Fiolon exclaimed.
    "Good," Uzun said. "Listen carefully, then. You established the bond in the
    first place by spending a lot of time together, didn't you?"
    "Just about every waking moment for seven years," Fiolon confirmed.
    "And even when Haramis tried to separate you, you both tried to stay together:
    you thought about each other often, and you tried to far-speak each other-and
    succeeded, am I not right?"
    "You're right," Mikayla admitted.
    "So it would take a lot of effort to break such a bond. Even were it not a
    strong one, even if you did not both possess much magic-
    "We do?" Mikayla gasped. "I mean, I know Fiolon has talent in that direction,
    but me?"
    "Yes, both of you. But even if you did not, the bond would be hard to break
    because it has been in existence for so many years.
    If both of you wished to break it, and you both worked at it, you could probably
    get rid of most of it within a month or two, although it would still probably
    reactivate in emergencies. If only one of you wished to break it, it would take
    at least a season or two of hard work-more if the other person was fighting your
    attempts."
    "Does this mean that Haramis can't break it?" Mikayla asked hopefully.
    "Against both your wills?" Uzun said dryly. "I very much doubt it."
    "She certainly can't do anything about it at the moment," Fi-olon said. "I'll
    bet she can't even tell that it's back."
    "What happened to her?" Uzun asked anxiously. "I knew something had gone badly
    wrong!"
    "I'm sorry, Uzun," Fiolon said. "I know you're fond of her- and the healers do
    think she'll recover in time," he added hastily. "But she had some type of
    brainstorm this morning. I missed part of it; I was writhing on the floor in
    pain at the time, but she collapsed, and she can't move the left side of her
    body at all, and she can't summon the lammergeiers-she wanted to send you a
    message, Uzun-and it's hard to understand when she tries to talk because only
    half her mouth moves." He paused, then added, "I can call the lammergeiers, but
    I was afraid that would only upset her more, and she's already really upset with
    me."
    "Who's taking care of her?" Uzun asked anxiously.
    "Ayah, mostly, and some healers from the Greenmire. They're giving her
    swamp-worm venom to thin her blood and keep it from blocking off more of her
    brain. They seem to think that a lot of the damage can be reversed, that she'll
    be able to move her left side and walk again and so forth."
    "What about her magical abilities?" Mikayla asked.
    Fiolon shrugged. "At the moment she doesn't seem to have any. And nobody knows
    whether they'll come back. Uzun, does that mean that Mikayla is the Archimage
    now!"
    "Oh, no!" Mikayla exclaimed. "I'm not nearly ready to be Archimage!"
    Uzun considered the question. "Probably not," he said finally. "If the power had
    passed to Mikayla, she'd know it. We'll just have to wait and see what happens."
    "What do you mean 'if the power had passed to Mikayla'?" Fiolon asked. "Would
    Mikayla automatically become Archimage if Haramis died?"
    "Yes," Uzun replied, "assuming, of course, that Haramis is right in thinking
    that Mikayla is her proper successor. If she's wrong, the power would pass to
    whomever it was supposed to go to."
    "You mean somebody else could wind up as Archimage and we wouldn't even know
    it?" Mikayla asked.
    "In theory it is possible, but it is highly unlikely," Uzun said firmly. "I'm
    pretty sure that you are meant to succeed her, Mikayla."
    "Uzun? What happens to you if Haramis dies?" Mikayla asked. "I mean, if she made
    you into a harp by a spell and extended your life beyond its normal span by her
    will and her actions, do you die when she does?" Mikayla, feeling very insecure
    all of the sudden, crawled over to Uzun and put an arm around his forepillar.
    "Do you know anything about the spell she used on you?"
    "It's in a book in the library," Uzun said. "You can look it up tomorrow. Right
    now, young lady, you can eat something and get a good night's sleep. You're no
    good to yourself or anyone else in the shape you're in. And as for you, Lord
    Fiolon," he added, "have you eaten anything today?"
    "Not since breakfast," Fiolon said. "First I was in too much pain, and then
    everyone was fussing over the Lady Haramis, and I just wanted to be alone, so I
    came here-
    "Where is 'here'?" Uzun broke in.
    "Here?" Fiolon echoed him. "Oh, that's right, you can't see. I'm sorry. Here is
    the old guard barracks at the top of the Tower. You and Princess Haramis went
    through here when you were escaping from the invaders; I'm in the room two
    floors down from where the lammergeiers carried you away."
    "Yes, I remember the place," Uzun said. "It's not used for the guards anymore?"
    "No, it's empty, except for a few old pieces of furniture. Mikayla and I have
    used it as a playroom for years."
    "I see," Uzun said. "I'll bet no one is in any hurry to look for you there when
    you're missing."
    "No, since it's up seventeen flights of stairs, it's not a popular destination
    for the servants. And usually no one misses us, as long as we turn up on time
    for meals."
    "Very well," Uzun said. "What I want you to do is this. Eat something and sleep;
    you need your strength as much as Mikayla does. Then, in the morning, go to
    Haramis and tell her that you dreamed of me, and that in the dream I told you
    that I knew of Haramis's illness and that I would care for and teach Mikayla
    until Haramis returns home."
    "All right," Fiolon agreed. "That should work out well. She'll probably assume
    that it was a sending from you, and if she thinks it was you using your powers,
    she probably won't ask if Mikayla and I have reestablished the bond."
    "But if she thinks about it at all," Mikayla protested, "she'll realize that we
    must have. Uzun, you said yourself that she couldn't break it without our
    cooperation."
    Uzun sighed, a faint ripple along the strings. "She is quite capable of assuming
    that you'll cooperate just because she told you to. And if she's suffering from
    a brainstorm, she may not think about it at all. In fact, she may not be
    thinking of anything at all."
    Chapter Eleven
    Haramis wakened. Sunlight was streaming into her room and across her, which was
    odd, because there wasn't a window there. But now there was. No, that's right,
    the sun always came in like that, I remember playing with the dust motes when I
    was a little girl. Her body felt strange, as if she had slept on it wrong; her
    left arm and leg were asleep and wouldn't wake up. In fact, she couldn't seem to
    move them. With some difficulty, because a lot of her muscles didn't seem to
    want to work, she turned her head away from the sun and saw a boy sitting at the
    right side of the bed. I should know him, she thought, but at the moment she
    couldn't quite place him.
    "Where is my mother?" she asked. "Where's Immu? Where are my sisters?" She
    barely noticed that her words came out slurred.
    The boy seemed to have no trouble understanding what she was saying, but he
    turned pale and gulped. "Do you know where you are, Lady?"
    "The proper form of address is 'Princess,' not 'Lady'-do you not know whom you
    are addressing?"
    "Uh . . " The boy hesitated for a moment, then blurted out, "Who do you think
    you are?"
    "I know I am Princess Haramis of Ruwenda, Heiress to the Throne," she snapped.
    "Who are you, and what are you doing here if you don't know even that?" She cast
    her eyes around the room. Why was she alone with this ignorant boy? "Who changed
    the hangings in my room? And where is everyone? Where's Uzun?"
    "Uzun is at the Tower," the boy said hastily. "He came to me in a dream last
    night and told me that he knew of your illness and that I was to tell you that
    he would care for and teach the Princess Mikayla until you were well enough to
    do it yourself again."
    "Who is Mikayla, and who are you?"
    "Mikayla is-well, Mikayla is a distant kinswoman of yours. You were teaching her
    magic before you became ill. I am Lord Fiolon of Var."
    "Are you related to my betrothed, then?" Haramis asked. "Did you come here with
    him?"
    "Prince Fiomaki?" The boy still looked uneasy. "He and I are distant kin, but he
    isn't here now."
    "When will he arrive? Our betrothal is to be celebrated soon."
    I don't know," Fiolon said. "But I shouldn't stay here talking and tire you; I
    was just supposed to deliver the message from Master Uzun. Why don't you try to
    rest, Lady-I mean, Princess. I'll tell the housekeeper you're awake."
    Haramis made a face, which felt strange. "Immu will probably insist on dosing me
    with one of her horrible potions. How long have I been ill? And what is wrong
    with me?"
    The boy left without answering; in fact he almost fled from the room.
    Haramis sighed. Something very strange was going on. But she was very, very
    tired-much too tired to worry about it. She went back to sleep, which would have
    surprised her if she had been capable of being surprised.
    Mikayla was dawdling over breakfast, which she was eating in the study so she
    could keep Uzun company. She still felt rather listless, but she reminded
    herself that the events of yesterday and last night would have tired anyone.
    Even though the horrible pain of having her bond with Fiolon severed had gone
    when the bond came back, her body still remembered it.
    She felt the sphere against her chest grow warm at the same time that Uzun said
    sharply, "What is that noise?"
    Mikayla fished the sphere out of the front of her tunic. It shook violently,
    making as close to a jangling sound as something that small could make. "Fiolon
    must be trying to reach me," she explained. "We found these small spheres in
    some ruins we were exploring in the Blackmire-they're about the size of my
    thumbnail," she added, remembering that Uzun couldn't see. "Haramis ought to
    have given you eyes, at the very least," she complained, angry on Uzun's behalf.
    The harp was silent.
    Mikayla sighed and continued her description. "The ones Fiolon and I took were a
    matched pair, and they seem to be some sort of device that the Vanished Ones
    used to communicate over distances, although I think that Fiolon and I are using
    them over more distance than they were originally designed for."
    The sphere shook even more, swinging back and forth on its ribbon, even though
    Mikayla wasn't moving it. "I'd better see what Fiolon wants; he seems upset."
    She looked into the sphere, and Fiolon's face looked back at her.
    "There you are, Mika," he said. "It certainly took you long enough to answer!"
    "I was eating breakfast," Mikayla said calmly. "What's wrong?"
    "Is Uzun there with you?"
    "I'm right here," Uzun replied. "Is it Haramis? Is she worse?"
    "Well, she doesn't seem to remember me or Mika, which might be considered an
    improvement," Fiolon replied, "but when I told her I was from Var, she asked if
    I had accompanied her betrothed, and where was he, and where were her mother,
    and her sisters, and Immu-Immu was the housekeeper when Haramis was a young
    girl, wasn't she? The same Immu who went with Princess Anigel on her Quest?"
    "Yes," Uzun said. "Are you saying that Haramis thinks she's still a young girl?"
    "She certainly seems to think so," Fiolon said nervously. "She asked who changed
    the hangings in her room, so I guess when they put her to bed they put her in
    the room she had as a girl. I suppose that would contribute to her thinking
    that. And when I called her 'Lady' she told me that she should be addressed as
    'Princess' and that she was heiress to the throne of Ruwenda."
    He sighed. "I gave her your message, Master Uzun, and then I got out of there
    before I had to explain to her that most of the people she was asking for have
    been dead for almost two hundreds."
    "Oh, my," Mikayla said. "How extraordinary. She doesn't know she's the
    Archimage?" She thought for a minute. Maybe this lets me out of here. Maybe I
    don't have to- "If she doesn't remember me, do I still have to study to be
    Archimage?"
    "Yes, you do," Uzun and Fiolon said together.
    "Well, if she's forgotten about me, maybe she'll pick someone else," Mikayla
    said hopefully.
    "Don't count on it," Fiolon said. "At the minute she barely knows her own name."
    "And today is the day you were planning to find the spell she used to turn me
    into a harp," Uzun reminded her.
    "Yes, that's right," Mikayla said. Even if Haramis has forgotten about me, I'm
    not leaving Uzun all alone. He doesn't deserve that. "I remember now; we talked
    about that last night." She teleported the dirty dishes back to the kitchen. "Is
    there anything you want me to do, Fiolon?"
    "While you're in the library, see if there's anything on brainstorms and memory
    loss," Fiolon said.
    "I'll look," Mikayla promised, "but medicine doesn't seem to be one of Haramis's
    interests. But as long as she's going to be gone for a while, I'll poke around
    the Tower and see what I can find-I'm sure there's a lot of stuff here that she
    never got around to showing me."
    "I'll check what's left of the library here," Fiolon said. "That should keep
    both of us out of trouble for today at least."
    "Fio," Mikayla said slowly, "she's really sick, right?"
    "Yes, but don't worry, Mika; the healers say she'll recover pretty completely
    over time."
    "How much time?"
    "I think you can count on several months at least," Fiolon said. "The healers
    aren't exactly saying, but that's the feeling I get."
    "Several months," Mikayla repeated, being careful to keep her face grave. Inside
    she felt like singing. Months! Time without Haramis hanging over her, spying on
    her, glaring at her across the table at meals, wanting her to be something she
    wasn't and didn't wish to be… "Well, if she reaches a point where she remembers
    my existence, greet her for me."
    "And give her my love," Uzun said swiftly.
    "I will," Fiolon promised. "And at least she remembers you, Master Uzun. That's
    a good sign, isn't it?" He sighed. "I'm off to stir up the dust in the library.
    If you hear coughing coming from your sphere, Mika, ignore it."
    Mikayla giggled. "I shall. Good luck with your search. I'll let you know if I
    find anything."
    "Do that," Fiolon replied. "Good luck to you also." His face shrank away as he
    moved the sphere away from it, then he put his sphere away and Mikayla's
    reflected nothing but her surroundings.
    Mikayla stood up. "I'm going to the library, Uzun, but I'll be back at
    lunchtime. I'll have Enya serve all my meals in here as long as it's just the
    two of us-unless you would prefer more time alone?"
    "Definitely not!" Uzun said emphatically. "I've spent more than enough time
    alone for one lifetime."
    "I'm sure you have," Mikayla said. I still don't understand how Haramis could do
    this to someone she claims to love. Talk about selfish behavior. "I'll make
    finding the spell she used on you my first priority."
    It took her several days, but finally she had a book she thought might be it.
    She brought it to the table with her, but waited until Enya had left the room
    before she opened it. Lunch was unusually skimpy, just bread and cheese, with
    sliced ladu fruit for dessert; evidently the household staff was demoralized by
    the news of Haramis's illness. Mikayla had let Uzun tell Enya about it, figuring
    that he could probably make it sound better than she could, but Uzun had an
    attack of his occasional pessimism…
    If the food doesn't improve in a few more days, Mikayla thought, I'll go down to
    the kitchen and talk to the cook myself. In the meantime a diet of bread and
    cheese isn't going to hurt me.
    "Uzun," she said, walking around the harp to examine him closely, "did the bone
    at the top of the forepillar come from the top of your skull?"
    "I think so, Princess," the harp replied, "but I wasn't conscious for that part
    of it."
    "Do you mind if I tip you toward me a bit so I can take a better look?" Mikayla
    asked. "You're about the same height I am, so I can't see it without tilting you
    or standing on a chair and leaning over you-and the chairs here aren't good to
    stand on; they're too soft."
    "You can tilt me," Uzun said, "but do it carefully. Don't drop me!"
    "I'll be careful," Mikayla promised. She grasped the harp firmly with one hand
    on the forepillar and one on the back of the frame and braced the top of the
    frame against her chest. At least this way if he falls, he'll land on me. She
    studied the fragment of bone carefully, twisting her head to compare it with the
    drawing in the book on the table next to her. Then she cautiously pushed Uzun
    back to his normal upright position and held him there until she was sure he was
    stable. "It looks like the top of a skull, all right; the lines on the bone
    match the lines in the drawing in the book. And according to this, it also
    needed somebody's blood -probably Haramis's-to fill a thin channel in the center
    of the forepillar."
    "That sounds right," Uzun said. "I remember that part. I was dying, and Haramis
    was standing over the craftsman who was building the harp, telling him to hurry.
    And when he was done, it still had a hole in the top of the forepillar. I
    remember watching Haramis cut her arm and hold it so that her blood ran into the
    hole… in fact, that's the last thing I remember. The harp didn't even have
    strings then."
    "She probably strung it while she was waiting for the bugs to eat the flesh off
    of your bones," Mikayla said, munching on a slice of ladu fruit.
    "Bugs?" Uzun sounded scandalized.
    "Yes, apparently they do a much faster and neater job than having a human or
    Oddling try to remove the flesh without damaging the bone. You just bury the
    body in a tub of soil with the right mix of bugs, and in a few days, you have a
    nice clean skeleton."
    "Haramis always was efficient," Uzun said faintly. "And if you're still eating
    lunch as you discuss this, I suppose you share her lack of squeamishness about
    such matters."
    "Well, it's not as if you were conscious at the time," Mikayla pointed out. "Or
    even alive."
    "Thank the Lords of the Air!" Uzun said fervently.
    Mikayla frowned down at the book. "All right, now I know how she turned you into
    a harp. By the way, how long ago was this? As I recall, she said it was her
    first act of great magic."
    Uzun thought about it for several minutes. "She had been Archimage for about two
    decades then, so I wouldn't say it was her first great spell. But I believe that
    it was the first time she used her power for personal gain," he said slowly.
    "Princess, if you can't make me a new body, can you set me free from this one
    when Haramis dies?"
    "Easily," Mikayla said. "To free you to move on to the next phase of existence,
    whatever it may be, all I have to do is take the bone fragment from the harp,
    grind it to powder, and cast it to the winds. And," she added fiercely, "I'm not
    Haramis. I'll release you anytime you ask me to, no matter how much I'll miss
    your company!"
    To her surprise, she burst into tears then, and she couldn't stop crying. "I'm
    sorry, Uzun," she sobbed, "I don't know what's wrong with me."
    "I suspect you're more worried about the Lady Haramis than you are admitting to
    yourself," Uzun said gently.
    "But I don't even like her," Mikayla sobbed, "and she hates me! She's always
    criticizing me. Nothing I ever do is good enough -and when I do something better
    than she expected me to she's furious. She took me from my home and family,
    she's kept me here for over two years now-I can't even go outside because I
    don't have any clothing but lightweight indoor tunics and a couple of night
    robes! She sent away my best friend; she tried to break the bond between us, and
    she hurt us both-and do you know what the worst of it is? She expects me to be
    grateful to her! I can't understand that at all! Why would anyone be grateful
    for what she's done to me?"
    Uzun sighed. "She's giving you what she thinks she would have wanted at your
    age; that's why she expects you to be grateful."
    Mikayla sat in silence for a time, thinking that over. "You know, Uzun, you are
    exactly right. She's even said so, now that I think of it: things like how she
    would have killed for the opportunities she's giving me-and she probably would
    have, too. She must be the most cold-blooded person I've ever met." She took the
    last slice of ladu fruit and stuffed it into her mouth. "Does she think that you
    should be grateful that she turned you into a harp, too?"
    "I think she feels just a little guilty about that now, especially since you and
    Fiolon came here and made your opinion of it obvious. I think she regrets making
    me blind."
    Mikayla snorted. "I'll bet she regrets a lot more making you immobile and unable
    to travel. Of course, she remembers you, but from Fiolon's description, it
    sounds as though she's forgotten you're a harp. Any guesses as to how long it
    will be before she demands your presence in her sickroom?"
    Uzun sighed. "If she doesn't remember that I'm a harp, I imagine she'll be
    asking for me the next time she wakes up."
    "And if she does remember that you're a harp," Mikayla added, "she'll probably
    start trying to figure out how to package you for shipment to the Citadel."
    Uzun came as close to shuddering as was possible for a harp. "Riding on the back
    of a lammergeier was terrifying enough when I had hands to hold on with. And I
    don't think my frame would survive the changes in temperature and humidity."
    "Nobody will send you anywhere if I have anything to say about it," Mikayla
    promised. But do I have anything to say about anything? "Uzun, who's in charge
    with Haramis away and ill?"
    "I don't know," Uzun said. "The question has never come up before."
    "It might be to our benefit to convince the servants that I'm in charge at
    present," Mikayla said. "Subject to your advice, of course, since you're
    continuing my magical training." And maybe I can order some warm clothing so I
    can go outside occasionally.
    "That sounds reasonable," Uzun said. "After all, Haramis did designate you as
    her successor."
    "Good," Mikayla said decisively. "I'll just act as though I'm in charge, you'll
    back me up, and with any luck no one will question it. Once everyone is in the
    habit of obeying me, it will take a direct order from Haramis herself to do
    anything to you that you don't want done.
    "As for transforming you," she continued, as something suddenly occurred to her,
    "you said that Haramis had been the Archimage for two decades when she turned
    you into a harp."
    "Yes," Uzun said. "Is that important?"
    "Was Haramis always as enthusiastic about books as she is now?"
    "Yes, from the day she learned to read, she was always studying. She had read
    every book in the Citadel library at least once by the time she was fourteen."
    And I've only read about a quarter of them, Mikayla thought. No wonder Haramis
    seems to think I'm lazy and stupid. But I do have other interests, which is more
    than she seems to.
    "And did she live here in this Tower from the time she became Archimage?"
    "She moved here just after Anigel was crowned Queen, and Haramis had been
    Archimage for about a month then, I think. But she had spent some time here with
    Orogastus, during her Quest for her Talisman."
    "So," Mikayla said, coming to her point, "by the time she turned you into a
    harp, she would have read every book in the library here, wouldn't she?"
    After a few seconds of stunned silence, there was a ripple along Uzun's strings
    that was the most despairing sound Mikayla had ever heard in her life. It sent
    chills down her backbone. "Yessss," the harp whispered. "She had read them all.
    So there is no other spell."
    "Not necessarily," Mikayla said with all the reassurance she could project. "But
    it's probably not in the library. I'm going to start exploring the rest of the
    Tower this afternoon. There are a lot of things that Haramis isn't interested
    in, and that's doubtless where the answers we seek are to be found."
    Uzun sighed. "It's true enough that if it's not a book or a musical instrument,
    Haramis is likely to ignore it. But, Mikayla, be very careful when you start
    poking around. Orogastus collected many things, and some of them are deadly."
    Chapter Twelve
    Mkayla decided to start her explorations at the top of the Tower and work down.
    She suspected that the bottom might be where the most interesting things were,
    but it wasn't impossible that there was something at the top, and she wanted to
    be sure she didn't miss anything. From what she had seen in all the time she had
    spent here, Haramis never went much above or below the middle of the Tower.
    The upper floors of the Tower were filled with all sorts of junk, dusty boxes
    full of old clothing (Mikayla spent one entire afternoon playing dress-up in
    clothing much too big for her, even as she told herself that she was wasting
    time and was too old for such games anyway), and barrels of old dishes. There
    was a chest containing some strange garments of silver, complete with gloves and
    a pair of strange silver masks. They were obviously a set, one for a man and one
    for a woman, but they felt strange to the touch and gave Mikayla a sort of
    crawly feeling down her spine. She packed them back carefully without even
    thinking of trying them on. Did these belong to Orogastus? she wondered. I'll
    bet they did, but who was the woman's costume made for? Did Haramis ever wear
    it?
    After several weeks of exploring everything in the main Tower except Haramis's
    bedchamber-Mikayla knew that Haramis would be very annoyed with her if she went
    poking about there without permission-Mikayla was finally ready to explore the
    lowest level. She had high hopes that she would find something useful there. So
    far, she hadn't found any devices of the Vanished Ones, and Uzun had told her
    that Orogastus had collected them and brought them there. Since she hadn't found
    his collection yet, it must be somewhere on the lowest level-or maybe below it.
    She didn't know what was down there, but she wanted to find out.
    Mikayla followed the winding stone stairway down from the living area, past the
    kitchens, and continued down. She was surprised to discover that it went even
    farther down than the stables, which she had thought were on the bottom level of
    the Tower. But the stairs branched there, with one branch leading straight down
    to the plaza and the other curling below the ramp that led from the stables to
    the plaza.
    Under the stables was a large storeroom, fully the circumference of the Tower.
    Mikayla spoke the command that provided light in the rest of the Tower, and a
    single lamp, suspended from the ceiling, sputtered to life. It flickered
    dreadfully; obviously its wick was in need of trimming.
    By the faint illumination provided by the old lamp, Mikayla could see the
    contents of the room. It was crowded with crates and barrels, placed
    haphazardly, but still leaving room to walk around them all. They were all
    labeled, in large letters visible even in the dim light, but none of the labels
    was in any language Mikayla could read.
    These don't look like household food stores, Mikayla thought, looking around
    with a sigh. I'm probably going to have to open every single container in here
    to determine what's inside.
    The floor was made of a strange silvery-black material, which Mikayla was sure
    she had seen before. She knew as she looked at it that there was something she
    should know about it, something important, but she couldn't remember what at the
    moment. It will come to me, she thought.
    She continued to the back of the room. Best to start at the far end and work my
    way back-Lords of the Air, what's that?
    "That" was a tunnel at the very back of the room, leading away from the Tower.
    Judging from its direction and the fact that it was carved out of solid rock,
    the tunnel went straight into the mountain. There were lamps hanging from spikes
    driven into the wall at regular intervals, but they weren't lit.
    Mikayla whispered the word that lit the lamps upstairs. To her delight, it
    worked here as well. The lamps flared to light, starting with the ones nearest
    her and extending down the tunnel, as if the flame were being passed from lamp
    to lamp. All of Uzun's warnings vanished from Mikayla's mind as she hurried into
    the tunnel, heedless of the cold rock under her slippers and the fact that her
    breath was making a fog in the cold humid air.
    The tunnel ended at a large door, almost twice Mikayla's height, and covered
    with frost. Mikayla, too excited to worry about such mundane matters as
    frostbite, grasped the large ring that served as a door handle and tried to pull
    the door open. It moved reluctantly, and the hinges shrieked as if she were
    causing them serious injury, but Mikayla scarcely noticed. She went through the
    door as soon as she had tugged it wide enough for her body to fit through it.
    She found herself in a large vaulted chamber of rough stone, with patches of
    black ice scattered irregularly around its walls. The floor here was paved with
    plain black stone tiles, and the same black stone had been used to make
    cupboards set into the walls as well as what appeared to be doors to other
    rooms. She tried one of the doors. Pushing against it had no effect; it felt
    like leaning against a wall. There was nothing on it to pull at it with, just a
    slight groove at one side of the panel. She suddenly realized that it was
    supposed to slide, rather than be pushed or pulled, and hooked her fingertips
    into the groove. It opened with surprising ease.
    The room behind this door was shallow, only about six paces deep, and it was
    very cold. I definitely need to get some warmer clothes, Mikayla thought,
    tucking her hands into her armpits and stamping her feet. She knew she wouldn't
    be able to stay here much longer without risking serious injury, but this was
    the most interesting thing she had ever seen. Does Haramis know about this? she
    wondered.
    Most of the wall she was looking at was covered with frost, but in the center of
    it there was a dark gray area that was relatively clear. Mikayla could see
    herself dimly reflected in the dark shining surface.
    "What is it?" she gasped, almost in awe.
    As she stood and stared the mirror brightened, ever so slightly, and a voice
    came from it, in such a faint whisper that Mikayla thought she was imagining it.
    "Request, please."
    I'm dreaming, Mikayla thought. Or I've been spending too much time with a
    talking harp. Mirrors don't talk.
    Of course, neither do most harps. Maybe this is some sort of strange scrying
    device. I wish Uzun were here. Of course, if he were, he'd… he'd want to see
    Haramis.
    "I want to see Haramis," she said aloud.
    "View Princess Haramis of Ruwenda?" the voice whispered.
    Mikayla shivered. The voice was definitely not human. "Yes," she said as firmly
    as possible.
    "Scanning." A picture appeared in the mirror, as if Haramis were just on the
    other side of the mirror. The colors were dim, but the details were clear, and
    Mikayla recognized the guest room in the Citadel where Haramis lay sleeping.
    Ayah sat by the side of the bed, keeping watch over the old woman. Mikayla
    noticed that the glamour Haramis always used in the presence of other people was
    absent, but at least her breathing sounded strong and regular.
    The picture vanished suddenly, and the faintest of whispers said, "Backup power
    exhausted. Recharge of solar cells necessary for further operation."
    It's not the only thing that needs the sun, Mikayla realized suddenly. I'm
    freezing here!
    She forced herself to slide the door to the mirror room closed, then hastily
    went back through the cavern and leaned her shoulder on the door from the
    outside to close it, not wanting to touch it with her bare skin, but afraid that
    the devices might be harmed if the doors were left open.
    The lights in the tunnel were burning low. It's a miracle that they work at all,
    Mikayla thought as she hurried up the tunnel as fast as she could move. I'll bet
    the servants never come down here. I'll have to ask Uzun about this place; maybe
    he knows something. But first I need a hot bath, and before I come back here I
    need warm clothes, and boots, and mittens!
    By the time she had thawed herself out-using the tub in Haramis's bathing room
    to do so-it was past time for dinner. She dressed in two of her indoor tunics,
    which left her feeling only slightly chilled, and went to talk to Uzun, pausing
    only long enough to stop by the kitchen and collect a tray of food and a pitcher
    of hot ladu-juice to take to the study with her.
    "Uzun," she asked, after she had eaten her food and drunk half the pitcher of
    ladu-juice and was feeling much more human, "have you ever heard of a cave in
    the mountain, under this Tower?"
    "Yes," Uzun said slowly. "Haramis told me that Orogastus worshiped the Dark
    Powers in caves of black ice there, and that he had a magic mirror that would
    let him see anyone in the Kingdom, just by saying their name. He used it to show
    her sisters to her."
    "Is what the mirror shows true, then?" Mikayla asked.
    "As far as I know," Uzun said. "Do I gather you found it? I thought it had
    stopped working long ago. What did you see?"
    "Haramis sleeping in a room at the Citadel, with Ayah-she's one of the
    servants-sitting by her bed."
    I know Ayah," Uzun said. "She's Enya's sister."
    "Really?" Mikayla was startled, then thoughtful. Perhaps the Archimage isn't as
    all-knowing as she would have us believe, but simply has spies planted around
    the Kingdom.
    "How did Haramis look?" Uzun asked anxiously.
    "She didn't have her glamour," Mikayla said, "so she looked old and tired, but
    her breathing was strong and regular and she seemed to be sleeping peacefully.
    They seem to be taking good care of her at the Citadel," she added reassuringly.
    "By the way, did she say that Orogastus's mirror was magic or that he said it
    was?"
    "She said that he called it a magic mirror."
    "That would explain it. It's not magic at all, Uzun; it's one of the old devices
    of the Vanished Ones. And it doesn't work very well; it showed! me what I asked
    to see briefly and then said that it needed more power." She frowned, trying to
    remember the words. "It said something about recharge of solar cells."
    "What's a solar cell?" Uzun asked.
    " 'Solar' means having to do with the sun…" Mikayla's voice trailed off as she
    realized why the silvery-black floor had looked familiair to her. She scrambled
    to her feet. "I'll be right back," she told Uzun, before running for her room
    and the music boxes she had hidden there.
    She returned a few minutes later with one, and set it down between the candles
    on the table, transporting her dinner dishes back to the kitchen to get them out
    of the way. The box began to play softly in the candlelight.
    "That's Haramis's old music box," Uzun said. "It was her favorite toy when she
    was a child. I didn't know she'd kept it. It must be getting old, though, the
    music used to be louder."
    "She didn't keep it," Mikayla said. "At least I would think that the one Fiolon
    and I found in the playroom at the Citadel was hers. It's still there, too. This
    is one of the ones we found in the ruins near the Golobar River-right before
    Haramis found us."
    "One of the ones?" Uzun said in a voice as close to excited as Mikayla had ever
    heard from him. "You found others? Did any of them play different tunes?"
    Mikayla laughed. "You're as bad as Fiolon. We found six or seven, I think. He
    took most of them home with him when Haramis sent him away, but I have two more
    in my room. Would you like to hear them?" A silly question, I'm sure.
    "Of course I would," Uzun said, "but later. This is important to you for some
    reason besides its music-you were talking about solar cells right before you
    suddenly ran off to get it."
    "Yes," Mikayla said. "You just remarked on how soft the music is. Listen
    carefully." She lit four more candles around the box, and the music grew louder.
    "It's louder," Uzun said, "but still not as loud as it should be."
    "When you heard it before, was the sun shining on it?" Mikayla asked.
    "Yes," Uzun said promptly. "Haramis kept it on a table near the window when she
    was playing it. If she put it away in darkness, it became silent."
    "Exactly!" Mikayla said with satisfaction. "It gets its power from
    light-preferably sunlight, because it's the brightest and, presumably, provides
    the most power." She extinguished the extra candles, and the music soon grew
    soft again. "Do you remember what the box looked like, Uzun?" she asked.
    "Only vaguely, I fear," Uzun replied.
    "On each side," Mikayla said, "there is a small piece, worked into the overall
    design, of a silvery-black material. Listen to what happens when I cover them."
    She carefully put a fingertip over each of the pieces, and the music died away
    into silence. "The rest of the box is still getting light," she told Uzun; "all
    I've covered is the silver-black stuff. I think these must be solar cells, small
    ones-a music box doesn't take much energy. But Orogastus's so-called magic
    mirror must need a lot. He built this Tower, didn't he?"
    "Yes, so the stories say," Uzun said. "And it certainly wasn't here in my
    father's time."
    "The floor of the room under the stables is made of what looks like the same
    material as these 'solar cells.' And it's the same level as the courtyard-do you
    know what the courtyard looks like when it's not covered with snow?"
    "No," Uzun said. "I've never seen it when it wasn't."
    "I did," Mikayla said, "the night of the day I made it rain, before I made it
    snow to cover the ice. With the ice all over it, I couldn't be sure, but I think
    the courtyard might be a solar cell. In fact, I think the entire Tower is built
    on top of what was supposed to be the power supply for the devices in the ice
    caves. That would be just the sort of thing Orogastus would do, thinking the
    devices were magic." The word twisted sarcastically in her mouth as she thought
    of what Haramis had said about Orogastus and true magic. "It never would have
    occurred to him to look for a physical power source, and I'll bet he wouldn't
    have recognized one if he walked across it-literally."
    "I think you are very probably right," Uzun said. "Can you prove it? And can you
    make this mirror work so that you can watch over Haramis?"
    Mikayla frowned. "We could put torches in the storage room under the stables,
    but much of the floor is covered, and torches may not be bright enough… I think
    I may need to use weather magic. Uzun, you told Fiolon to tell Haramis that you
    would teach me-I assume that means you can teach me?"
    "Of course I can teach you, Princess," Uzun replied, sounding somewhat offended.
    "Can you teach me weather magic? In your present form?" Mikayla asked. "I don't
    doubt for a moment that you can do magic-or could do it-but you're going to have
    to tell me everything and rely on my eyes and my ability to describe results.
    Those aren't exactly ideal teaching conditions."
    "We'll manage," Uzun said briskly. "We have no other choice. What is it you want
    to learn first?"
    "Well," Mikayla said, trying to think of all the necessary steps, "first I'd
    better make sure-first thing in the morning-that my theory about the plaza being
    a solar cell is correct. I'll sweep a bit of it clear-at the edge of the chasm
    so we can just pitch the snow down there. I should be able to get a few of the
    Vispi to help, don't you think? They can handle the cold.
    "Which reminds me," she continued, "I'm going to have to raid Haramis's wardrobe
    for tomorrow; I don't own anything I can wear to go outside. And I'll have to
    get the servants to make me some warm clothing. I'll ask Enya at breakfast time,
    but I may need you to back me up. I suspect that Haramis may have ordered that I
    not have warm clothing so that I wouldn't be able to escape from here."
    "Surely not!" Uzun gasped. "Haramis wouldn't do that."
    "Then it must be coincidence that all I have are lightweight indoor tunics and
    slippers fit only for indoor use-the pair I was wearing the day Fiolon left were
    ruined when I went outside in them, and I could go outside only because Haramis
    let me wear one of her cloaks. And I need warm clothing even if I'm not going
    outside-you can't imagine how cold the ice caves are!"
    "Then we'll get you warm clothing," Uzun said. "I had forgotten how cold it is
    here, outside of this room and the other rooms at mid-Tower. It's been so long
    since I've moved from this spot…"
    Oh, bother, Mikayla thought in dismay, now I've upset him again. She hastily
    went back to the original subject. "If the plaza is a solar cell, I'll shove as
    much snow into the chasm as possible, then use rain to clear the rest. The plaza
    slopes a little bit toward the chasm, so that ought to work. Do you know
    anything about the geography around here? Is putting rain and snow into the
    chasm going to harm anything?"
    "To the best of my recollection," Uzun said, "no. But remember that what I know
    of this area is derived from scrying and watching Haramis use the sand-table.
    It's too cold for a Nyssomu to be outside-if Haramis needs to send one of us to
    the lowlands with a message, she seals him in a special version of a sleep sack
    and straps him onto a lammergeier. The lammergeier flies to a village in the
    lowlands, near the end of the Great Causeway, where the villagers unpack the
    messenger, and he continues on foot or by fronial from there."
    "How does he breathe?" Mikayla asked curiously. "The sack must be pretty close
    to airtight if it keeps a Nyssomu anywhere near his normal temperature."
    "It gets pretty stuffy," Uzun admitted, "but, as the lammergeier flies, the
    village isn't far away, so we're in no danger of suffocating."
    "Wouldn't it be simpler just to send one of the Vispi?" Mikayla asked.
    Uzun actually laughed at that. "The Vispi refuse to leave the mountains. They
    are adamant on that subject."
    "Why?" Mikayla asked.
    "I'm not sure," Uzun said. "Perhaps part of the reason is to preserve their
    legendary status as the 'Eyes in the Whirlwind' whose true form no one ever
    sees."
    "Come morning," Mikayla said decisively, "they can whirl some snow from the
    plaza into the chasm." She ticked off the steps in her mind: find out if there
    really is a solar cell there, uncover it if there is, let the sun charge the
    cell… "I've got it, Uzun. The next weather magic I need to learn is how to keep
    the skies clear. Can you teach me that?"
    "Easily," Uzun assured her.
    "Thank you," Mikayla said. "I've got a busy day tomorrow, so I'm going to bed
    now. Good night, Uzun."
    "Good night, Mikayla," the harp replied, its strings absent-mindedly starting to
    play a lullaby. Mikayla went down the hall, smiling as the music drifted after
    her.
    Chapter Thirteen
    Mikayla came down to the study early the next morning, just as the sun rose,
    carrying the spheres Haramis had given her. "I thought of something after I went
    to bed last night, Uzun," she said. "I may not need to have the servants here
    make me warm clothes. I can have Fiolon bring me some from home. Even if my own
    don't fit anymore, there are always the hand-downs from my older siblings-the
    housekeeper has several chests full of them."
    "The Lady won't like it," Uzun warned.
    "Won't like what?"
    "Having Fiolon here."
    "Then she should have stayed here and stayed healthy enough to be in a position
    to object," Mikayla snapped. "She can't very well train me to be the next
    Archimage when she doesn't even remember my existence!"
    "Maybe she does by now," Uzun said hopefully.
    "That's why I brought the spheres with me," Mikayla said. "We can bespeak Fiolon
    and see how she's doing."
    "Very well." Uzun sighed. "It's not as if I could stop you anyway."
    "You make it sound as though I'm proposing to practice black magic! What does
    Haramis have against Fiolon anyway?" Mikayla had wondered about this for a long
    time, ever since she had realized that Haramis disliked Fiolon.
    "He's male."
    "And?" That's hardly a reason, and surely she has some reason for disliking him,
    though I can't imagine what it could be. He's always been better behaved than I
    am, and he was polite and respectful to her, which is more than I was.
    "I think that's all, really," the harp admitted. "The only male human sorcerer
    she ever met or heard of was Orogastus, which was not much of a recommendation."
    "It was also almost two hundreds ago!" Mikayla protested. "That's an awfully
    long time to distrust an entire sex based on the actions of one person!"
    "Haramis is a woman of strong opinions," Uzun said mildly.
    "Strong, unchanging opinions," Mikayla agreed grimly. "If you weren't being so
    polite, you'd call her unreasonably stubborn." She sighed. "Let's see if Fiolon
    can tell us how she's doing."
    Getting in touch with Fiolon was a bit more difficult than usual, since Mikayla
    had to wake him up in the process. But finally his sleepy face appeared in her
    sphere and he grumbled, "What do you want?"
    "Good morning to you, too," Mikayla replied. "First, Uzun would like to know how
    Haramis is doing."
    "The healers seem encouraged," Fiolon said, "but I was in there yesterday-very
    briefly-and she called me a Labornoki spy. She seems to be up to the point in
    her life where the invasion was taking place. She keeps asking where Uzun is,
    and why he isn't in attendance on her, so she obviously doesn't remember that
    she turned him into a harp."
    "Oh, I wish I could attend on her!" Uzun said passionately. "Do you suppose that
    if we packaged me very carefully…"
    "No, I'm afraid not," Mikayla said. "You wouldn't fit in one of the sleep sacks
    she uses to transport Nyssomu, and you're the wrong shape to strap onto a
    lammergeier's back. And Haramis would be very upset indeed if you were damaged
    in the attempt. Besides, at this point, it might be quite a shock to her to find
    out that she had turned you into a harp."
    "I suppose you're right." Uzun sighed.
    "So, Fiolon," Mikayla continued hopefully, "she doesn't remember either of us
    and probably won't for quite a while, right?"
    "It looks that way."
    "Good," Mikayla said with satisfaction. "And nobody else is likely to question
    your absence if you say you're going exploring."
    "What am I exploring?" Fiolon asked cautiously.
    "You'll love it," Mikayla promised him. "Orogastus built this place on top of a
    series of ice caves filled with devices of the Vanished Ones. And then he
    collected everything of theirs he could find-and it's all in barrels and boxes
    in the level under the stables. It's an absolute trove of knowledge!"
    "Some of which may be extremely dangerous," Uzun admonished them.
    "If you're planning to poke around and mess with devices Orogastus collected,
    I'd better come keep an eye on you," Fiolon said with more enthusiasm than
    Mikayla had heard from him since Haramis sent him away.
    "Absolutely you should," she agreed promptly. "Who knows what sort of trouble I
    might get into without you here to restrain my enthusiasm for strange and new
    things?"
    "Shall I bring back the fronials the Archimage sent me here on?" Fiolon asked.
    "No, leave them there," Mikayla said. "She may need them when she's well enough
    to come home. I've been talking to the lammergeiers, and none of them can
    bespeak her since she took ill."
    Uzun gave a gasp of dismay, and Mikayla hastily added, "Of course, that may
    change as she gets better. Right now she presumably doesn't remember that she's
    supposed to be able to speak to them, and that may be the only problem.
    "Anyway," she continued her instructions to Fiolon, "pack all the warm clothing
    you can get your hands on, for you and for me. Go into the clothing chests if
    you have to-I think I've grown a bit taller since I've been here. But what fits
    you will probably still fit me. Be sure to bring warm mittens and boots; it's
    very cold in the ice caves, and we'll probably have to spend quite a bit of time
    there. Then tell the servants something plausible to explain your absence-don't
    tell them you're coming here, not after that stupid scene Haramis made right
    before she took ill-and go east on the Great Causeway until it crosses the
    river. Then go north half a league on the west bank of the river, and a
    lammergeier will meet you there. Have you got all that?"
    "Yes," Fiolon said promptly, his sleepiness completely gone. "I should be there
    about midday or shortly thereafter."
    "Wonderful," Mikayla said. "I'll have Enya make up a room for you, but I may be
    a bit vague about how long you'll be staying."
    "That's probably a good idea," Fiolon agreed, "since we don't know how long I
    will stay."
    Mikayla bundled up in the warmest clothes she could find in Haramis's room. When
    Enya protested against her borrowing Haramis's clothing without permission,
    Mikayla took the opportunity to tell her that she was expecting Fiolon later
    that day with her own clothing and to ask Enya to prepare a room for him. "As
    for the Lady Haramis, they are caring for her at the Citadel and are hopeful
    about her recovery, but I'm afraid that at present she's in no condition to give
    permission for anything. Until she recovers, I shall be continuing my studies
    under Master Uzun's direction."
    Enya might not have been happy about it, but there wasn't much she could do. At
    Mikayla's request, she assigned one of the Vispi to help Mikayla dig snow off
    the plaza. Enya didn't like it, but Mikayla didn't care.
    It was great to be outdoors. Mikayla felt more alive and more real than she had
    since she had first come to the Tower. Being shut up indoors with Haramis made
    her feel like a shadow or a ghost, but now, outside in the sunlight, she felt
    wonderful, perhaps even slightly larger than life, connected to the rest of the
    world, instead of cut off from it. And Fiolon would be with her again today.
    Mikayla was happier than she ever remembered being in her entire life. Even the
    grumbling of the Vispi whom Enya had assigned to help her couldn't dampen her
    spirits.
    It took the two of them the rest of the morning to clear snow completely off a
    small area of the plaza next to the chasm, but by midday, Mikayla was able to
    return indoors, soak in Haramis's tub until her body thawed out, then order a
    very large lunch to be served in the study, where she gave Uzun the good news.
    "It's a solar cell, all right," she said, "thank the Lords of the Air. If the
    solar cell hadn't extended across the plaza, we'd probably have had to tear down
    the building to recharge the cell." She grinned. "Haramis really wouldn't have
    liked that."
    "So what will you do now?" Uzun asked.
    "I've asked the Vispi to shove as much of the snow on the plaza into the chasm
    as possible; that will mean that I'll have less of it to melt when I make it
    rain, which I plan to do tomorrow. This afternoon, you can explain to me how to
    keep the temperature high enough so that the rain doesn't turn to snow, and how
    to keep the skies clear once I've got the plaza free of snow. It's a good thing
    that the plaza is on the south side of the Tower-at least it will get what sun
    there is. But it will probably still take several days to recharge the power.
    Once I've got the mirror working reliably, I can use it to check on Haramis. And
    it's possible that it-or maybe something else stored down there-will give me the
    clue I need to learn how to make you a new body."
    "New body?" came a voice from the door. "Is there something wrong with the
    harp?"
    "Fiolon!" Mikayla leapt to her feet and ran to hug her friend. It felt
    wonderful; she hadn't realized how starved she had been for human contact, and
    how much she had missed Fiolon. He had grown more than she had while they had
    been apart; when she had seen him last they had been the same height, but now he
    was half a head taller than she was. But he still felt the same, solid and
    reassuring, her best friend, her other half. Their psychic bond was a good
    thing, but being with him in person was much better.
    "I'm so glad to see you!" She dragged him to a seat at the table, sat down
    across from him, and looked him over. His hair was longer than he had worn it
    before and was windblown from the journey, but to Mikayla he looked beautiful,
    especially when he looked up and smiled at her. She felt warm all over. "Are you
    hungry?" she asked. "I ordered enough lunch for both of us."
    "Good," Fiolon said, reaching for a plate. "I'm starved. But I brought
    everything you asked for. And I brought all the music boxes, too-it occurred to
    me that Master Uzun may not have heard all the tunes on the ones we found in the
    ruins."
    "That was very thoughtful of you, Lord Fiolon," Uzun said, in tones as close to
    enthusiastic as Mikayla had ever heard from him. "I shall look forward to
    hearing them."
    Fiolon paused to gulp down a large bite of food, then turned to Uzun. "Is
    something wrong with your harp?" he asked anxiously.
    "No, not at all," Uzun said. "It's just that with Mikayla here and Haramis gone,
    I'm finding being a harp to be rather confining."
    Fiolon nodded. "There is a difference between loving music and being music," he
    agreed, "and keeping track of what Mikayla is up to is not something you can do
    if you're stuck in one place. I'll do what I can to help."
    "You can start by studying weather magic with the princess," Uzun said tartly.
    "We don't need any more accidental snowstorms."
    The three of them spent the rest of the afternoon in technical discussions of
    weather and how to control it, and Uzun ordered them to bed directly after
    supper. "You have a busy day ahead of you tomorrow, and you'll need all your
    strength."
    Neither Mikayla nor Fiolon was disposed to argue with that statement; they went
    to their rooms immediately. They'd both had one busy day already.
    The next morning, they ate breakfast early and went over the process with Uzun
    one more time before going to the workroom. With two of them to power the
    spells, making it rain wasn't difficult at all. Once they had the basic spell
    set, they moved to the window to watch it work.
    At first it was just soft rain, almost a heavy mist, but as the storm gathered
    itself together the rain grew heavier. In the workroom, which lacked the warm
    air grilles of the living quarters, it was cold and damp.
    "This is really depressing weather," Fiolon remarked.
    "But it is clearing that plaza," Mikayla pointed out.
    "How can you tell?"
    Mikayla smiled at Fiolon's grumpy tone. She had always been the optimist of the
    pair. Still, he did have a point. Between the rain and the wind and the snow
    higher up on the mountain, there was a great cloud of dim fog all around the
    Tower, and visibility was limited. Mikayla admitted, but only to herself, that
    she had not anticipated the fog. It looked like the ghost of a giant Vispi.
    "Be thankful Haramis isn't here," she said. "Remember how when she was starting
    to teach me, she'd pick the most horrible, seemingly useless things and demand
    that I tell her what they were good for?"
    Fiolon nodded. "So what's the fog good for?"
    "If you watch the way it drifts, you can tell which way the wind blows here.
    Rain and snow are a little too solid and heavy; the fog is light enough and
    visible enough so that you can see the pattern."
    "Hmm." Fiolon studied it for several minutes. "The wind seems to be coming from
    the west-from Mount Gidris. That's where Haramis found her Talisman, you know."
    "Did she?" Mikayla asked. "No, I didn't know. What's on Mount Gidris?"
    "A bunch of ice caves, which tend to be rather unstable. Don't go exploring
    there, Mika, all right?"
    "I'm not planning to-oh, no; I think we've got trouble." Mikayla pointed to the
    precipitation still falling from the sky.
    It was late afternoon, and the rain was beginning to change to hailstones. "Stop
    it," Fiolon said, dashing back to the table. "Quickly!"
    Mikayla was right behind him, and together they pushed the storm down the slope
    and away from the Tower. When the clouds were gone, the sun shone faintly near
    the western horizon.
    "The courtyard's still wet"-Mikayla sighed-"and it will probably freeze over
    tonight. I do hope that once the cell is charged, we'll be able to find some way
    of keeping it free of snow."
    "Me, too," Fiolon said. "I'd hate to have to go through this every few days."
    "Well, we're done for today at least," Mikayla pointed out. "We'll try to finish
    up tomorrow. Let's go down to the kitchen; I want to get something hot to drink
    and to tell the servants to stay out of the plaza. I don't want any of them
    hurt."
    Enya found a couple of small stools for them to sit on and provided hot drinks
    for them at once; she had a large pot of hot ladu-juice set over the fire. Next
    to the fire were several very unhappy-looking Vispi.
    "What did you do to the weather?" one of them asked in the voice of someone too
    wretched to care that he was being rude to his social superiors. "It's not
    supposed to be wet here! The damp hurts my lungs." He coughed miserably. The
    rest of the Vispi just huddled near the fire and looked unhappy.
    He was correct, Mikayla realized. When it snowed here, the air stayed dry. In
    fact, even the snow in this region was on the dry side for snow. And the air was
    very thin at this height.
    She remembered Uzun's laughter when she asked why Haramis didn't use the Vispi
    to carry messages to the lowlands. "That's why you don't leave the mountain,
    isn't it?" she asked. "You're used to thin, dry air. It's not the heat that
    bothers you, it's the humidity."
    "My grandsire tried to go down the hill once," one of the younger Vispi said.
    "He didn't go far, and when he came back, he said it was like trying to breath
    adop soup!"
    "He was right," Fiolon agreed. "After you've been up here awhile, you adjust to
    the air here. Then when you descend, what you're breathing feels much too thick
    and warm." He shrugged. "I readjusted after a day or so, of course, but I'm not
    at all sure that a Vispi could. I've never heard of one that did."
    "I shan't ask any of you to go down the hill, then," Mikayla said. "As for the
    rain and the fog, it should be gone in another day or so, or by tomorrow if
    we're really lucky. Which reminds me, everyone should stay off the plaza-I'm
    afraid it's going to turn into a sheet of ice again tonight."
    The Vispi groaned, and even the Nyssomu, who didn't go outdoors, looked
    depressed. Enya sighed. "Princess, do you mind if I make up pallets on the floor
    here for the Vispi and let them sleep by the fire?"
    "Not if you don't mind," Mikayla replied. "It's your kitchen. They certainly
    won't be in my way here; so as long as they're not in yours, I certainly have no
    objection." She rose to her feet. "Thank you for the hot drinks, Enya. Fiolon
    and I will get out of your way now. Will an hour from now do for dinner? You
    don't have to cook something fancy, anything warm will do-even adop soup."
    Enya chuckled. "Dinner will be in the study in an hour. Princess. And I think I
    can do better for you than adop soup."
    Drying the plaza was a bit more difficult than Mikayla had anticipated. Even
    when the sun was high the next day, it was still too cold to melt the ice and
    dry the solar cell. And high clouds kept drifting overhead from the direction of
    Mount Gidris, hiding the sun a good part of the time. At one point, it even
    began to snow briefly, causing both of them to dash to the workroom to stop it.
    Finally Mikayla and Fiolon bundled up in warm clothing, took a pair of torches
    each, and started melting the ice by nonmagical means. Since the plaza sloped
    gently downhill from the Tower door to the chasm, they started at the door. Once
    that ice melted, the water was warm enough to help melt the ice farther on. Bit
    by bit, they worked their way across the plaza. By sunset, about a third of it
    was clear of ice and dry.
    "I think that's all we can do for today," Mikayla said, straightening up with a
    sigh. Her back hurt from spending so much time stooped over holding a torch near
    the ground. Oh, well, she thought, at least my feet are warm. "I think we'll be
    able to finish this tomorrow."
    "If we're lucky," Fiolon groaned. "And if our muscles hold out."
    "We may have charged part of it already," Mikayla said cheerfully. "The torches
    aren't just heat, they're light as well." She looked at Fiolon. "Do you want to
    see the ice caves now?"
    A low moan was his first response. Then he added, "Tomorrow, all right? All I
    want now is a hot bath and a warm dinner."
    "Me, too," Mikayla said. "We can check out the caves at midday tomorrow-we'll be
    wanting to take a break then anyway."
    "I don't doubt that in the slightest." Fiolon sighed. "Mika, are you sure that
    this is going to work?"
    "I'm not absolutely positive," Mikayla admitted, "but I think that the chances
    are very good. The mirror said that the solar cell needed to be recharged, this
    plaza certainly looks like the part of the music boxes that has to be exposed to
    light for the music to play, and we are exposing it to light. So it should
    work."
    "It sounds as though it should work," Fiolon agreed, "and I certainly hope that
    it does. I would hate to have done all this for nothing."
    Chapter Fourteen
    Mikayla went to bed immediately after dinner and slept the sleep of total
    exhaustion. When she woke the next day, she was horrified to find that the sun
    was already high; she had slept through half the morning. She scrambled out of
    bed and into her clothing, ignoring the agonized protests of her sore muscles.
    She went down the hall and poked her head into the room assigned to Fiolon. He
    wasn't visible, but the lump in the bed revealed that he had overslept as well.
    "Fiolon!" she called.
    After a minute, the bedding twitched slightly and there was a reply-if one
    counted "Mmmph?" as a reply.
    "I'm going out to work on the plaza," Mikayla informed him. "You can join me
    whenever you're ready."
    She stopped briefly in the study on the way downstairs to say good morning to
    Uzun and to tell him where she was going. The harp returned her greeting but
    made no other comment. She continued on to the kitchen, where she grabbed a hunk
    of bread and a couple of torches. She lit one of them in the fire, noticing with
    a small part of her mind that the Vispi who had been huddled there in misery the
    other night were gone, and hurried down the remaining stairs and outside.
    She stopped just outside the door and stared around her in amazement and
    delight. The sky was a brilliant blue, without a single cloud visible anywhere
    she looked. The sun was shining brightly over the entire plaza, and the air was
    warm! Actually, the air still felt cool as she breathed it and where it touched
    her face, but its temperature was obviously above freezing, for nearly all the
    ice on the plaza had melted. The section she and Fiolon had gone over the day
    before was still dry, as was an area quite a bit beyond it. Perhaps a fifth of
    the plaza, closest to the edge, had water running down it, dripping into the
    chasm below.
    Mikayla ate her bread while she inspected the plaza, then lit the second torch
    from the first and continued the task of drying the portion of the plaza that
    was still wet. To her delight, the job went quickly, and she had made
    significant progress by the time Fiolon joined her. With his help, the job was
    soon done. By lunchtime, they surveyed a clear, dry plaza/solar cell, which was
    efficiently soaking up the sun's light. When Mikayla, out of curiosity, took off
    her mittens and gloves and bent to touch the ground, she nearly burned her hand.
    She was so excited, however, that she didn't care.
    "This should do it, Fiolon," she said. "The mirror should work now. Let's go
    look at it!"
    "Did you eat breakfast?" Fiolon asked.
    Mikayla stared at him. "How can you think of food at a time like this?"
    Fiolon chuckled. "Because it is a time like this, and because I know you, Mika.
    Once you get into the cave, you're going to want to spend the rest of the day
    there. So let's eat lunch first, all right?"
    "Lunch." Mikayla looked at him in disgust. "The wonders of the Vanished Ones
    wait for us and you want to go eat lunch."
    "The wonders of the Vanished Ones aren't going anywhere," Fiolon pointed out.
    "They've been here for at least a couple of hundreds, so they can wait for us a
    little bit longer. Besides," he added with a grin, "your stomach is growling."
    Unfortunately, he was correct. Mikayla's stomach obviously didn't share her
    enthusiasm for research. "Oh, all right"-she sighed with a martyred air-"if you
    insist."
    "I do insist," Fiolon replied, grabbing her arm and towing her toward the
    kitchen.
    After lunch they took a lantern-Fiolon vetoed torches on the grounds that some
    of the material stored on the lower level might be flammable, explosive,
    sensitive to heat, or have all of those properties-and went down to the storage
    level. Fiolon examined the writing on the boxes with interest. "I wish I could
    read this language," he said.
    "Or even puzzle out this alphabet," Mikayla added. "Maybe we can find some way
    to learn it."
    "That would be interesting," Fiolon admitted, following her into the tunnel.
    Since they had a lantern with them, Mikayla did not bother to light the ones
    along the tunnel, but simply hurried along until she and Fiolon arrived at the
    door to the cave. Together they dragged the door open enough for them to go
    through and then Mikayla led the way to the room with the "magic mirror."
    "Oh!" Fiolon gasped, obviously impressed.
    "Request, please," the voice said. The voice was much stronger than it had been
    a few days before, and Mikayla noticed that there was less frost on the wall
    around the mirror, giving the mirror a larger surface area.
    "View Princess Haramis of Ruwenda," she said promptly.
    "Scanning." The picture appeared in the mirror, as it had before. But the colors
    were no longer dim, and the details were so clear that it seemed as though one
    could reach out and touch Haramis, who lay sleeping, with Ayah sitting by the
    side of the bed, keeping watch over her. Haramis still looked like a sick old
    woman, but her breathing was strong and regular-and clearly audible through the
    mirror. Mikayla could even hear the soft creak of the chair when Ayah shifted
    her position in it.
    "By the Flower," Fiolon whispered. "I wonder what else it can do?"
    "I wonder," Mikayla murmured.
    "Request, please," the voice said again, although the view of Haramis did not
    change.
    "View Quasi," Mikayla said, curious as to how their old friend and guide fared
    these days.
    "Subject not on file," the mirror replied.
    It doesn't know who Quasi is, Mikayla realized, but there may be another way to
    get the same results. "View Citadel Knoll," she said.
    The mirror obligingly displayed a picture of the Citadel and the knoll around
    it. The viewpoint made it appear that they were hanging in midair above it,
    looking down.
    Mikayla chewed her lip, trying to guess how to word the next request. "View land
    to the west of the Citadel Knoll," she said, hoping that the mirror would
    understand her words as she meant them.
    "Static view or scan?" it asked.
    Since Mikayla wasn't sure what the choices meant, she picked one at random.
    "Scan."
    The picture in the mirror began moving, as though they were flying westward from
    the Citadel. Mikayla mentally tucked this away as the mirror's meaning for
    "scan" and watched carefully for Quasi's village. "Stop," she said as soon as it
    came into sight. She frowned at the picture in the mirror. It didn't look right.
    The colors were wrong for this time of year.
    "I wish we could see this closer," Fiolon muttered beside her.
    "Close view on structures?" the mirror asked.
    Mikayla and Fiolon looked at each other and shrugged in perfect unison. "Yes,"
    Mikayla replied.
    The village in the picture grew larger, as if they were dropping toward it. Now
    Mikayla could see why the colors were wrong. The vegetation around the village
    was dying. As the picture in the mirror got closer to the ground, she could see
    several Nyssomu sitting on a bench outside one of their huts. Quasi was one of
    them.
    "There's Quasi!" Fiolon said excitedly. "I haven't seen him in ages, not since
    Haramis brought us here." He frowned. "He looks a lot older, doesn't he, Mika?
    Has it really been that long?"
    Mikayla counted on her fingers as the mirror said, "Identify subject Quasi."
    "He's the one in the middle," she told it absently, while adding to Fiolon, "No,
    it's only been two years-or maybe three. I tend to lose track of time here, but
    it hasn't been that long."
    In the picture Quasi's figure was suddenly outlined in bright red. "Subject
    Quasi?" the voice asked.
    "Yes," Mikayla replied. "That's Quasi."
    "Subject Quasi marked for future reference."
    Whatever that means, Mikayla thought. Then the mirror added sound to its
    picture.
    "The rains are out of season," one of the Oddlings was saying.
    "And the ground trembles," another one added as he approached the group on the
    bench. "These are evil omens."
    "Why does the Archimage not mend the land?" someone asked. "Quasi, you have met
    her. Is she not a powerful sorceress? Why does she allow this to happen?"
    Quasi looked unhappy. "She's ill," he said. "One of my sisters is a healer-"
    "We know that," the first Oddling interrupted him.
    "-and she was summoned to the Citadel several weeks ago to treat the Archimage,"
    Quasi continued. "With swamp-worm venom," he finished ominously.
    Apparently everyone in the group knew what that implied, judging from the
    virtually identical looks of dismay. "Will she recover?" one asked.
    "My sister thinks so," Quasi replied. He looked around at the dying plants. "Let
    us pray to the Lords of the Air that she will recover soon. It goes ill with the
    land when the Archimage grows old and ill."
    Mikayla frowned and noticed that Fiolon looked dismayed as well. Now that Quasi
    mentioned it, she could feel what he was talking about. Dimly she could sense
    wrongness throughout Ruwenda, as if the land itself were ill. She felt a bit ill
    herself. The land was out of control; things were going wrong, and she felt that
    she should be able to fix them, but she didn't know how. Obviously her need for
    magical training had just become much more urgent than it had been when Haramis
    was well and controlling everything. Which meant that finding Uzun a body so he
    could train her properly should be done right away. Could the mirror find help
    for her?
    Mikayla pondered how to word her question. "Scan magicians," she said, a bit
    tentatively.
    "Specify all or by race."
    Mikayla thought about that one for a minute. "Human," she finally said.
    The mirror displayed a series of pictures of humans working magic, changing from
    one to another at short intervals. Mikayla recognized one of them as a magician
    who came to the Citadel from time to time-he had produced some truly spectacular
    illusions for one of Prince Egon's birthday parties. Suddenly she gasped and
    said, "Stop!"
    "Hold this display and mark for future reference?"
    "Yes," Mikayla said, staring in fascination at the screen. A small group of
    humans stood around a table on which a wooden statue of a woman lay. One of them
    was anointing the body with some kind of ointment while one stood at the head,
    swinging a thurible that gave off a thick cloud of incense, and one held
    something to the mouth. The statue had painted open eyes and looked amazingly
    lifelike.
    A man stood to one side, reading aloud. "Opening of the mouth," he said,
    obviously beginning a set of instructions. The phrases that followed made no
    sense to Mikayla, but she continued to watch as they went through the ceremony,
    dressed the statue in fresh clothing, and lifted it to a standing position. A
    pile of clothing that had apparently been removed from it earlier lay on the
    floor next to the table.
    Mikayla looked at their surroundings, trying to find some clue as to where they
    were. A small room with a low ceiling, which was quite crowded with the number
    of people in it. The room was apparently cut out of solid rock, but there was no
    ice on the walls. Mikayla suspected that it was probably in the mountains
    somewhere, but where? "Where are they?" she wondered aloud.
    "Locate Temple of Meret?" the voice asked.
    "Is this view the Temple of Meret?" Mikayla asked.
    "Yes."
    "Locate Temple of Meret," Mikayla repeated.
    The view changed to a map of the Peninsula. There was a black dot, which Mikayla
    realized was her own location, and a red dot on the north side of Mount Gidris,
    near the top of the mountain, but definitely on the Labornoki side of the peak.
    Some lettering appeared next to both dots, but it was in the same unknown
    alphabet as the lettering on the boxes outside.
    "I do wish I could read that!" Fiolon said in frustration. Mikayla didn't blame
    him. He had been silent and patient while she had been watching the magic,
    probably realizing, as she did, that the mirror would consider anything said to
    be a new request.
    Obviously that was how it viewed Fiolon's outburst. "Initiate reading tutorial?"
    it asked.
    Mikayla and Fiolon looked at each other, wide-eyed with surprise. What is this
    thing? Mikayla wondered. I do hope we can get it to tell us someday. In the
    meantime… She nodded at Fiolon to indicate that he should answer the mirror.
    "Yes," Fiolon said, his voice cracking with a mixture of excitement and
    nervousness.
    "Name of student?"
    Fiolon gulped. "Fiolon of Var," he replied.
    "Name of second student?"
    Mikayla exchanged a glance with Fiolon, shrugged, and said simply, "Mikayla."
    The mirror went blank and then showed a character, next to a picture of a small
    house. "Alef," it said.
    "Alef," Fiolon repeated.
    The mirror repeated the process with four more characters, and then it showed
    only a line of five characters without their accompanying pictures. One of them
    lit up.
    Fiolon was silent, and Mikayla wondered what the mirror wanted him to do. But
    she didn't dare ask, or say anything. After about half a minute, the mirror
    said, "Alef."
    "Oh, I see," Fiolon said. "It's testing me to see if I recognize the letters."
    "Alef," the mirror repeated.
    "Alef," Fiolon replied.
    The letter flashed again, and Fiolon said "Alef' without being prompted.
    Apparently the mirror approved, for it went on to the next letter. Fiolon
    rattled them off with no further hesitation. The mirror then repeated the
    exercise again. Fiolon did it perfectly, and the mirror went back to displaying
    individual characters, new ones this time.
    Fiolon and the mirror went through the process four more times, with the final
    display showing twenty-five characters in five lines of five. Apparently this
    was the entire alphabet, for after Fiolon had named them all correctly, the
    mirror said, "Lesson One completed for student Fiolon of Var."
    It displayed the alphabet again, and said, "Student Mikayla." Mikayla didn't get
    the sequence perfectly right the first time, for she hadn't been paying
    attention quite as closely as Fiolon had, but she got it on the second try, and
    the mirror said, "Lesson One completed for student Mikayla." Then it added,
    "Power level low. Hiatus for recharge." The mirror went blank, and Mikayla and
    Fiolon quietly left the room, closing the door carefully behind them.
    As they went back down the tunnel Mikayla was surprised to find that her feet
    hurt. "How long were we standing there, anyway?" she asked.
    "I don't know," Fiolon replied, looking at the lamp he was carrying. "But it was
    long enough to burn a lot of lamp oil."
    They stopped by the kitchen to return the lamp, and Enya said, with obvious
    relief, "There you are! Where did you two disappear to? You're three hours late
    for dinner, and Master Uzun has been fretting about you."
    "Does this mean you're not going to feed us?" Fiolon asked anxiously. "We didn't
    mean to be late; we were exploring and lost track of time."
    Enya shook her head. "Boys!" She sighed. "No matter what the race, they're all
    the same. Yes, of course I'll feed you. You two go up to the study and assure
    Master Uzun that you're alive and well, and I'll bring your dinner up there."
    "Thank you, Enya," Mikayla said. "We'll try not to be late for meals again."
    Uzun was inclined to be querulous about their having been gone for so long.
    "I'm sorry, Uzun," Mikayla said. "But I've got good news. I think we've located
    some people who can help make you a new body."
    "Really?" Uzun said in astonishment. "So soon? Where? And who?"
    "There's a place on Mount Gidris called the Temple of Meret," Mikayla said.
    "That's right," Fiolon said, frowning, "it was on Mount Gidris. I'm not sure you
    should go there, Mika."
    "I know you said it was unstable on this side," Mikayla began.
    "Very unstable," Uzun interjected.
    "But the Temple is on the other side, and it didn't look at all unstable. That
    wasn't an ice cave; that was a regular cave, carved out of solid rock. And if it
    were unstable, they wouldn't be working there."
    "It is true," Uzun said slowly, "that Princess Haramis's Talisman was in an ice
    cave on this side of Mount Gidris. But the cave collapsed when she removed the
    Talisman, and only her faithful lammergeier Hiluru saved her from dying there,
    with her work unfinished."
    "Since the only way I'm likely to be able to reach the Temple of Meret at all is
    by lammergeier," Mikayla pointed out, "I can fly out at the first sign that the
    north side of the peak is unstable."
    "That's true," Fiolon said. "But I still have a bad feeling about this."
    Mikayla fingered the green ribbon around her neck. "I'll bespeak you every
    night," she said. "I promise. That way you'll know how I'm doing, and you can
    tell Master Uzun."
    Fiolon looked at her in surprise. "You expect me to stay here without you?" he
    asked. "What if the Lady Haramis comes back?"
    "If she comes back, then you can leave," Mikayla said.
    "Since she'll undoubtedly throw me out," Fiolon pointed out, "I'll have to."
    "But it doesn't look as though she's coming back anytime soon," Mikayla said,
    adding, "and you can check every day in the ice mirror. That way you'll have
    some warning of her return, and you can tell me so that I can get back before
    she does.
    "But the main reason I want you to stay here is so that Master Uzun won't be
    alone," she continued. "He can't go down to the ice mirror and see how the Lady
    Haramis is doing; if you aren't here, all he can do is sit here in the study and
    brood. And that wouldn't be fair to him at all!"
    Fiolon nodded. "You're right, Mika. I should have thought of that."
    Uzun said formally, "You are welcome to remain here as my guest, Lord Fiolon. I
    would welcome the opportunity to share my music with you-and I believe you
    mentioned some music boxes from the ruins of the Vanished Ones?"
    Fiolon's face lit up. "I'd be delighted to learn anything you could teach me
    about music, Master Uzun. And I'll be happy to share the music boxes with you."
    "Good," Mikayla said. "That's settled then." She added to Fiolon, "And when you
    check on Haramis in the mirror, you can continue your reading lessons."
    "Reading lessons?" Uzun asked. "Don't you already know how to read?"
    "Not the language of the Vanished Ones," Fiolon said. "The mirror seems to have
    some sort of teaching program, in addition to its ability to let you watch a
    person or people and to show you where they are. Come to think of it, Mika, I'll
    probably be able to see you in the mirror. It should know who you are from the
    language lesson."
    "And even if it doesn't," Mikayla pointed out, "it knows where the Temple of
    Meret is." She tried to figure out how the mirror's ability to locate people
    might work. If it could view only people it knew… "How did the mirror know who I
    meant the first time I asked to view Haramis?" she wondered aloud.
    It was Uzun who answered that. "It had been asked to view her before," he
    explained. "Orogastus used the mirror to keep track of Haramis and her sisters.
    She told me about it."
    "I wonder how he first identified them to it," Mikayla mused.
    The harp was silent.
    The next morning Mikayla went down to the mirror with Fiolon. Haramis was awake,
    but still seemed to be trapped back in her past. She was still asking where Immu
    and Uzun were, and what was going on, and was the army of Labornok close by, and
    why wasn't anyone telling her anything.
    "She sounds really cross," Mikayla said. "Even though her speech is still rather
    slurred, you can tell." She sighed. "I know it's selfish of me, but I'm glad
    she's not here. At least at the Citadel there are a lot of people who can take
    turns taking care of her."
    "That's true," Fiolon said, thinking it over. "There aren't many servants here,
    and they all seem to have plenty of work just keeping this place running. It
    would be awkward to have her be sick like that here."
    "Very," Mikayla agreed. "I bet everyone would expect me to take care of her-and
    I'm not a good nurse. Besides, Haramis doesn't even like me!"
    Fiolon looked back at the screen. "At the moment I'd say she still doesn't
    remember you. Maybe when she recovers, you'll get the chance to make a new start
    with her."
    "Maybe," Mikayla agreed glumly. "But I don't think it will help. I don't think I
    could ever be the kind of person she would like."
    Fiolon silently patted her on the shoulder, and then had the mirror start Lesson
    Two of the reading program.
    At lunchtime, Mikayla said good-bye to Uzun, surprised at how reluctant she was
    to leave him. I guess it's mostly because he's the only one here who has been
    willing to accept me as I am, without pressuring me to change into a copy of
    Haramis. "You and Fiolon take care of each other," she said, trying to keep the
    tremor out of her voice. "I'll be back as soon as I can with your new body."
    "Fare well, Princess," Uzun said. "And be careful."
    "I shall," Mikayla said, "but I really don't think that side of the peak is
    unstable."
    "The peak may not be," Fiolon muttered, "but the Lords of the Air alone know
    about the people."
    Chapter Fifteen
    The lammergeier dropped her off on the path, just out of sight of the Temple,
    and Mikayla followed the path to the Temple's main entrance. The land felt
    different on this side of the mountain, almost wild, as if it had no Archimage
    and never had. But surely Haramis is Archimage of Labornok as well as Ruwenda,
    Mikayla thought.
    The Temple was easy to find; it seemed to radiate energy, although it was energy
    of a type Mikayla had never encountered before. It didn't draw power from either
    the land or the air, and the energy that she sensed did not seem to act upon the
    land. It floated in the air, like the fog had at the Tower when she had been
    working weather magic. Yes, she realized, that was what it reminded her of; it
    seemed to be some sort of excess, something unheeded, shaken loose from whatever
    the primary magic being worked was.
    Casting a glamour to make herself unremarkable, as Uzun had taught her, she went
    inside quietly and followed the sound of voices. The outermost portion of the
    Temple was an enormous room. The ceiling was so high that Mikayla could barely
    see it, and while the room was full of pillars, fashioned in many different
    forms, the pillars were far enough apart that a full-grown lammergeier could fly
    between them with its wings fully extended.
    Mikayla examined the pillars she passed on her way through the hall. The ones
    nearest the entrance were an icy blue white and were shaped like stalactites and
    stalagmites meeting in the center. The only light in this hall was the daylight
    spilling in from outside, so it got darker as she went farther into the cave.
    But there was still enough light to see that the design of the pillars changed
    as one moved away from the entrance. The ones farther in were many different
    colors and were in the form of various types of plants-mostly trees, although
    Mikayla did recognize a few flowers among them. And a good many of them were
    things she didn't recognize. She wished she were looking at them through the
    mirror and could ask it to identify them.
    The next room in had a higher floor and lower ceiling and was lit by a pair of
    oil lamps hanging from the ceiling at the front of the room. There was a dais
    below the lamps, hidden on one side by a curtain; the rest of the room had
    wooden benches decorated with elaborately carved designs set on both sides of a
    center aisle. The benches were nearly all filled, but Mikayla found a seat in a
    back corner. No one seemed to notice her; people were talking to their neighbors
    and presumably waiting for something to happen.
    Then two people in long black robes with golden masks covering their faces
    entered and took their places on the dais. One of them said something brief that
    Mikayla didn't catch, and the people in the room all sat down and grew quickly
    silent.
    Then they started chanting, and everyone else joined in. After a few minutes
    Mikayla found herself singing along with everyone else-even though she had never
    heard either the words or the tune before in her life. This was not even a style
    of worship she had ever encountered before. It was as if the chant was in the
    room, and if you were in the room-even if you were wrapped in a dark cloak,
    hidden in an unlit corner, out of everyone's sight- you were part of the chant.
    Or maybe it was part of you.
    "Meret, Thou Lady of the Southern Peak, have mercy upon us."
    "Meret, Thou who makest the Noku, the River of Life, to rise from the Underworld
    to give life to the Land, have mercy upon us."
    "Meret, Thou who savest us from the venom of the Worm, have mercy upon us."
    "Meret, Thou who…"
    The chanting was simple and repetitious; anyone-however simpleminded, unmusical,
    or unfamiliar with the entire idiom- could pick it up in a few minutes. Mikayla
    wondered vaguely if it had been designed that way on purpose.
    In any event, it was making Mikayla feel very strange. She felt as though she
    were falling asleep, but she couldn't be, because she was still singing. Still
    her eyes kept closing despite her best efforts to keep them open, and her head
    dropped forward until her chin touched her chest. This is magic, she realized
    suddenly. It's not a type I'm familiar with, but this is definitely magic. She
    concentrated long enough to get a basic personal shield around herself and her
    thoughts, and then, feeling safe enough for the moment, relaxed back into the
    chant.
    After about half an hour, the chanting stopped, and one of the figures in the
    golden masks, a man by his voice, began speaking. Some of what he said was
    familiar to Mikayla; she remembered reading bits of it in several of the books
    in Haramis's library. But as the man went on speaking she realized that his
    account differed from the ones she had read. At one point, she found herself
    opening her mouth and saying aloud, "That's not true!" Fortunately she didn't
    say it loudly, and her voice was lost in the chorus of folk loudly agreeing with
    their leader. At least now Mikayla was awake, free of whatever spell the chant
    held.
    He was a convincing speaker, she had to admit that. He seemed completely
    sincere, and quite possibly was. But the doctrines he was advocating, such as
    the need for sacrifice, and the efficacy of blood (he was a bit vague about
    whose blood) to wash away the troubles that beset the people, were centuries
    out-of-date. The one thing of which Mikayla was perfectly sure was that the
    books she had read about this sort of religion were old, very, very old. And
    Haramis had told her that blood sacrifice had been stopped in Ruwenda long
    before even the Archimage Binah was born. So why was anyone advocating it now?
    Well, this is Labomok, not Ruwenda, Mikayla thought. But Labomok and Ruwenda
    were united almost two hundreds ago, when Prince Antar married Princess Anigel.
    And Prince Antar was the only surviving member of the Labornoki royal family. I
    think.
    Granted, as the youngest princess, I never really studied history or government,
    but surely Labomok is ruled from the Citadel. How has this religion survived
    here?
    Still, if this is what it takes to get Uzun a proper body, I guess I should be
    glad it survived, however it did. And if Haramis used her own blood to put Uzun
    into the harp, then blood magic can't be totally forbidden or wrong.
    Besides, there was magic in the room; Mikayla could clearly feel the power being
    raised, and there was no blood being shed here now. She was no stranger to
    power; even as a child she had used it sometimes for simple things such as
    mind-speaking to Fiolon, although she had never realized that what she was doing
    was magic until Haramis started training her.
    But the power with which she was familiar was a solitary power, raised by one
    person, even though that person might be drawing on things outside herself, such
    as boosting the power by sitting in direct sunlight, for example, and using the
    sun's warmth. And since Haramis had started her on the cram course in "How to Be
    an Archimage in Many Difficult Lessons," Mikayla had learned much more about how
    to use other power sources for magic.
    But what she had learned from Haramis was still basically a solitary magic,
    linked with the land, but not with other people. Here was a group of people
    being molded into a single source of power-even Mikayla, despite her training
    and her shields, could feel herself being sucked in. Who controlled this power,
    and what was being done with it?
    The man stopped talking, and the chanting started again. This time, although the
    congregation was chanting the same words as before, as was the man who had been
    speaking, the other person at the front of the room-and several other women,
    judging by their voices-were singing something in counterpoint in a different
    language. Mikayla couldn't see any other woman there, but there was the curtain
    on one side of the dais. Perhaps the singers were hidden behind it. The overall
    effect was exotic and mysterious, perhaps, Mikayla thought, even spooky.
    Despite her unease, the chant took hold of Mikayla again. It soon seemed to her
    that it had always been with her and would go on forever; she could hardly
    remember a life that had not been spent in this room, chanting along with
    everyone else. Mikayla did not notice when she fell asleep.
    * * *
    "Well, what have we here? A gift from the Goddess?"
    Mikayla sat up, blinking, and focused on the young man standing over her. It
    took her a moment to orient herself, to remember that she was in the Temple of
    Meret and to realize that she had fallen asleep on the bench where she had been
    sitting. The man, apparently about three or four years older than she was, still
    held a broom carelessly in one hand. He must have been sweeping the room,
    Mikayla thought. I guess my glamour wore off while I was asleep, so he found me
    when he reached this corner.
    "Looking for someplace warm to sleep?" the young man asked, leering unpleasantly
    at her. "You can sleep with me, girl- I'll bet we will become good friends." He
    dropped the broom against the bench, leaned over and pinned Mikayla against the
    wall, and kissed her. At first, shock held her motionless, but when he tried to
    force his tongue between her lips, she was overcome by outrage. Making a fist,
    she slugged him in the stomach as hard as she could. He released her and doubled
    over, trying to get his breath back.
    "How dare you?" she exclaimed, breaking free of him and retreating toward the
    center of the room so that he couldn't pin her in the corner again. "Have you
    gone mad? You can't treat me like that!"
    "By the Worm, what's the matter with you, girl?" he snarled, getting his breath
    back and approaching her again, albeit more warily than before. "You're carrying
    on as if you were a royal virgin!"
    "I am!" Mikayla snarled back.
    "Of course you are," he snapped sarcastically, "and I'm the Husband of the
    Goddess Meret!"
    "Really?" a dry voice interrupted from the front of the room. "Strange; I
    thought I held that office." From his voice, Mikayla was pretty sure that this
    was the man who had led the chanting. He was dressed in a long black robe, but
    he no longer wore the gold mask over his face.
    Mikayla decided that she liked his face. He had gray hair and regular features,
    and the lines on his face hinted at a sense of humor. "What seems to be the
    problem, Timon?"
    "She"-Timon indicated Mikayla scornfully-"says she's a royal virgin."
    The Husband of the Goddess regarded her thoughtfully. Then he made a sudden
    gesture with his hands, his fingers twisting in a pattern Mikayla could not
    follow. A blue light surrounded her, and she gasped.
    "You have nothing to fear, child," the Husband said, "as long as you tell the
    truth. Are you a virgin?"
    "Yes," Mikayla replied. The blue glow remained steady.
    "As you can see, Timon," the Husband said, "she is a virgin. And virgins are
    scarce enough here that we don't want to lose one." He looked sternly at the
    young man. "So forget whatever you were thinking about her. And leave her alone
    in the future." Timon glowered, but bowed his head in apparent acquiescence.
    The Husband turned to Mikayla. "Come with me, my child."
    Mikayla briefly considered bolting for the exit and summoning a lammergeier to
    carry her away from here, but reminded herself that she was here to get Uzun a
    new body. Tliere's no point in running away quite yet, she told herself. And I
    don't think the Husband of the Goddess Meret means me any harm. Actually, he
    seems nice. Maybe he'll be willing to help me.
    The priest led her through the entrance in the front of the room by which he had
    entered, down a hallway to the left, and into a room that was apparently the
    Temple library. Mikayla was still surrounded by the blue glow-it had moved when
    she did-but she ignored it as she looked around at all the scrolls. They have a
    bigger library than the Citadel and the Archimage put together, she thought in
    awe. Surely they will have the answers I need to help Uzun.
    The Husband clapped his hands sharply twice, and a young boy, clad in a short
    black tunic tied with a cord at the waist, ran into the room.
    "Yes, my Father?" he said, apparently expecting to receive orders.
    "My respects to the Eldest Daughter of the Goddess Meret, and I should
    appreciate it greatly if she would join me here as soon as possible."
    The boy didn't answer; he simply bowed and ran from the room. Within minutes
    there was the sound of sandaled footsteps in the stone hall, and a tall woman in
    a black robe came in.
    "What do you wish, my Father?" she asked deferentially. Then she saw Mikayla.
    "Who is this?"
    The Husband sat in an elaborately carved chair and pointed to a bench behind
    Mikayla. The woman sat down in a simpler chair by one of the reading tables, and
    Mikayla took that as her cue to be seated on the bench. The Husband smiled at
    her encouragingly. "I'd like you to answer a few questions for me. You said you
    were a virgin, is that true?"
    "Yes," Mikayla said, trying not to sound bored. She was getting tired of
    repeating it. What's so important about being a virgin? she wondered. Everyone
    is one at birth.
    "And you are of royal birth?" The woman's eyes widened, but she remained silent.
    "Yes," Mikayla said again.
    "Who are your parents?"
    Mikayla didn't know why, but she felt a sudden reluctance to give her parents'
    names. Perhaps it was the memory of something Uzun had said to her in the course
    of her studies with him. "Names have power," he had told her. "To know a
    person's name is to have power over that person."
    "My father is the King of Ruwenda and Labornok," she said simply, "and my mother
    is his Queen."
    "Is she royal?" the priest asked.
    "Princess of Var," Mikayla replied briefly.
    "Your pardon, my Father," the woman said quietly, "but if I may?" He inclined
    his head, and she turned to Mikayla. "Does this mean that you are a direct
    descendant of Prince Antar of Labornok?"
    "The one who married Princess Anigel?" Since coming to live with the Archimage,
    Mikayla had learned more about the triplet princesses and their Quest than she
    had ever wanted to know, despite her general lack of attention when the subject
    came up. But Fiolon and Uzun spent so much time trading ballads on the subject
    back and forth that it was impossible for Mikayla to avoid getting the general
    outlines of the story.
    "Yes," the woman replied.
    "Then I am," Mikayla said. "He and Anigel were my
    I-don't-know-how-many-greats-grandparents."
    "A princess of the royal family of Labornok," the woman said softly. "I can
    hardly believe it. Truly Meret favors us."
    "Indeed She does," the man murmured. "Do your parents know that you are here?"
    he added, returning to more practical matters.
    "No," Mikayla said. "If they think about me at all, they probably think I'm
    locked up in the Archimage's Tower." Two sets of eyebrows raised, and two sets
    of eyes regarded her thoughtfully.
    "Locked up?" the man asked. "Why?"
    "The Archimage has some crazy idea that I'm supposed to be her successor,"
    Mikayla explained. "She took me when I was twelve, and I haven't seen my family,
    or left her Tower, since then."
    "It sounds perfectly miserable," the woman remarked sympathetically. "Where does
    the Archimage think you are now? And why did she let you go?"
    Mikayla shrugged. "She didn't let me go, and she doesn't know where I am. Last I
    heard, she didn't remember my existence." At their questioning looks, she
    continued. "She took ill while visiting the Citadel, with some sort of
    brainstorm. She doesn't remember a lot of things, especially recent things, and
    she's had me for only about two years."
    The Husband and the Eldest Daughter exchanged glances.
    "Two years," he said, almost to himself. Obviously this meant something to him.
    "She's been training you as her successor," the Daughter said. It was not a
    question, but Mikayla nodded anyway.
    "That explains quite a lot," the Daughter remarked.
    Have they noticed the strangeness in the land, too? Mikayla wondered. Haramis
    should be Archimage of Labomok as well as Ruwenda; has her illness disturbed the
    balance here as well? It didn't feel quite that way to me, but I don't know
    Labomok the way I do Ruwenda.
    "Yes," the Husband agreed, turning back to Mikayla. "Why have you come here,
    then?"
    Mikayla decided not to try to explain the "magic mirror." She had noticed how
    angry Haramis got when she mentioned devices of the Vanished Ones, and she
    didn't want these people angry with her. "I have a friend," she explained, "and
    he needs a new body. And I saw this Temple in a vision, and there were people
    working on a statue." She frowned, trying to remember exactly what it was she
    had seen and to figure out how best to describe it. "They were performing some
    sort of ritual, something about opening the mouth. And I thought perhaps the
    people here could help me make a new body for my friend."
    "What's wrong with the body he has now?" the Husband asked.
    "It's a harp."
    "A harp?" the Husband sounded incredulous. "Are you sure?"
    "Of course I'm sure," Mikayla said. "I've been living in the same Tower with him
    for years. He's a harp, and he's blind, and he can't move. And that makes him
    very unhappy since the Archimage took ill, because he can't scry and see her the
    way I can. And she keeps asking for him-apparently she's forgotten that she
    turned him into a harp about one hundred and eighty years ago-and he wants to go
    to her. And he can't."
    "He's been a harp for nearly two hundreds?" the Husband asked.
    Mikayla nodded.
    "How was that done?"
    "Somebody made the harp," Mikayla explained, "and the Archimage put some of her
    blood in a channel in the middle of the pillar, and there's a part of the top of
    my friend's skull at the top of the pillar. He doesn't remember exactly how it
    was done, since he was dead for part of it."
    "So you have access to a piece of his original body-this skull fragment," the
    priest said thoughtfully, "and his spirit resides in this harp. Yes, I believe
    that under the circumstances, we could make a new body for him." He looked at
    her. "What is your name?"
    The blue glow still surrounded her, and Mikayla was fairly sure that it was some
    sort of truth spell. And if she wanted their help, refusing to answer was
    probably not a good idea. "Mikayla."
    "Princess Mikayla." The Husband bowed his head slightly to her. "I believe that
    we can give you what you want. Are you prepared to give us something in return?"
    "If it is within my power," Mikayla replied cautiously. What do I have that they
    could possibly want?
    "We want a month of your time each year for the next seven years," the Husband
    said. "Each spring, when the river rises and the three moons come together, will
    you spend a month with us, as a Daughter of the Goddess, living with the other
    Daughters and taking part in the rituals?"
    "Somebody would have to teach me the rituals," Mikayla said. I can't imagine why
    one more Daughter for the rituals would be worth much, but if that's all they
    want, I should be able to manage it. And it will at least be a change from
    listening to Haramis scold me or Uzun mope about Haramis's illness.
    "We will teach you everything you need to know," the Eldest Daughter said. "But
    you do realize that you will have to remain a virgin for the next seven years?"
    "That's not a problem," Mikayla said. "Haramis wants me to remain a virgin for
    the rest of my life."
    "Haramis is the Archimage?" the Husband asked.
    Ooops! Mikayla thought. I didn't mean to give them her name. On the other hand,
    it's in so many ballads that it's hardly a secret. She nodded.
    "Have you made any vows to her?" the Husband asked. "Or to anyone else?"
    "No," Mikayla said, with just a bit of the resentment she felt toward Haramis
    showing in her voice. "She's always been too busy telling me things to ask me to
    promise anything."
    Both of them smiled at her. "We are asking," the Husband said. "In exchange for
    a new body for your friend, will you spend a month with us each year for the
    next seven years?"
    "Yes," Mikayla. "I will."
    "Very good," the Husband said. "I will speak to He Who Causes to Live about the
    body for your friend. It will take him seventy days to give birth to the new
    body; can you remain with us that long?"
    Mikayla thought of the image of Haramis as she had last seen her. It doesn't
    look as though she'll be recovered enough to miss me before seventy days are up,
    she thought. Seventy days isn't long. And even if she does come back sooner,
    it's worth it. I don't care if she does get angry with me for leaving the Tower.
    Uzun is a friend; he's been good to me, and I want to help him. Aloud she said,
    "Yes, I can stay here that long."
    "Excellent," the Husband said. He turned to the Daughter. "I commit her to your
    charge, Eldest Daughter."
    The woman stood up, and Mikayla hastily followed her example. "Yes, my Father,"
    the woman said, bowing. She turned to Mikayla. "Come with me, Little Sister."
    Mikayla bowed briefly to the priest. "Thank you, my Father," she said. He smiled
    and nodded to her, clearly dismissing her from his presence.
    The Eldest Daughter took Mikayla's hand and started towing her rapidly down the
    hall. "You will be housed with the Daughters of the Goddess," she explained. "We
    do not use personal names here. I assume that you do know that true names have
    power; I notice that you did not give the names of your parents. As one of the
    Daughters of the Goddess, you will address Her Husband as 'Father.' I am
    addressed as 'Eldest Sister' and the other Daughters are called 'Sister.' Is
    that clear?"
    "Yes, Eldest Sister," Mikayla replied, paying careful attention to what she was
    being told. She had the definite impression that she was expected to learn these
    lessons quickly and correctly. And for the first time in over a year, she cared
    about what she was being taught.
    She was here by her own choice, and for her own reasons. She had given her word
    and accepted theirs, a situation quite different from that at Haramis's Tower.
    She wasn't sure exactly what they wanted from her or what she was supposed to
    learn, but for Uzun's sake and to accomplish her goal of getting him a proper
    body, she was going to try her hardest to be what they wanted her to be.
    Besides, she thought, they asked me if I were willing to do this; they didn't
    just tell me to do it and expect me to obey like some mindless puppet.
    They entered an antechamber, then passed through a curtained doorway on the far
    side of it. On the other side of the curtain was a large chamber cut out of the
    rock of the mountain and brightly lit with torches set in the wall at frequent
    intervals. A number of other rooms with brightly colored curtained doorways led
    off it. "The Daughters live in these apartments," the Eldest Daughter told her.
    "You are not to go beyond the curtain we just passed without permission, and you
    must never leave these rooms unless one of the other Daughters is with you. Do
    you understand?"
    "Yes, Eldest Sister."
    "Good." The priestess clapped her hands together sharply; the sound echoed
    through the rooms. Four young women came out of various side rooms to gather in
    the central chamber. They appeared to range in age from four to six years older
    than Mikayla, and they looked at her curiously, but they seemed pleasant enough.
    They were dressed in heavy white, long-sleeved, high-necked robes, tied with
    white cord at the waist. "We have a new Sister," the Eldest Daughter announced,
    indicating Mikayla.
    "Welcome, Sister," the others murmured in chorus. Mikayla noted that they spoke
    in unison and on the same pitch.
    "I thank you for your welcome, Sisters," she replied. She hoped that she would
    fit in here. At least they were all smiling at her. Unlike Haramis, none of them
    seemed to dislike her on sight. Maybe they would even be friends.
    "Your room will be the one with the green curtain," the Eldest Daughter informed
    her. "There is a chest in there with clothing that should fit you, Please put it
    on, and rejoin us here. You have much to learn."
    "Yes, Eldest Sister." Mikayla hurried to do as she was told.
    Chapter Sixteen
    Mikayla looked quickly around the room assigned to her. It was small and had a
    very low ceiling; she could reach up and put the palms of her hands flat against
    it without having to straighten her arms completely. Along one wall was a bed,
    with some sort of fur that Mikayla did not recognize serving as a blanket. Next
    to the head of the bed was a stand with a pitcher of water, a washbasin, and a
    rough towel. The clothing chest that the Eldest Daughter had mentioned was at
    the foot of the bed.
    Mikayla changed into a white gown like the one the other Daughters wore. There
    were several of them in the clothing chest, as well as a couple of gowns in
    other colors. She was glad to find that the high neckline hid the ribbon of the
    sphere she wore around her neck and that the fabric was thick enough to muffle
    any noise it might make.
    Unlike the Archimage's Tower, these rooms did not have much in the way of
    heating, which was doubtless why the clothing was so heavy. But the only shoes
    in the chest were sandals. Mikayla put them on, remembering that both the
    Husband of the Goddess and the Eldest Daughter had worn sandals. Perhaps
    everyone here did, especially if they didn't have to leave the Temple. Mikayla
    considered what she had seen as she approached the Temple. From the air, it was
    virtually invisible. Even if one was looking straight at it, which could not be
    done from above, it appeared to be a natural cave. Perhaps the people living
    here didn't leave, but in that case, where did they get food and other necessary
    supplies?
    Stop it, Mikayla told herself. This is no time to try to analyze every detail of
    their society. I'll have plenty to do trying to keep up with the things they
    want me to learn.
    She returned to the main room. There was a single long bench at the far end of
    the room, in front of a fireplace. The other Daughters were sitting there
    waiting for her. One of them, the one sitting on the end, patted the spot next
    to her, and Mikayla quickly slid into place.
    The Eldest Daughter stood and faced them. "Since our new Sister does not know
    our ways yet, we will start with the dawn chant." She fixed her eyes on Mikayla.
    "I shall sing a line and you will repeat it." Mikayla nodded.
    "Hail to you, O Meret…"
    "Hail to you, O Meret," Mikayla dutifully repeated. To her relief, all the
    Daughters were repeating it with her, helping to cover up any mistakes she might
    make. She had the uneasy feeling that the Eldest Daughter heard all her mistakes
    anyway, but at least she didn't feel alone and exposed, the way she had when
    Haramis had been teaching her.
    "Lady of Eternity, Queen of Gods…"
    "Lady of Eternity, Queen of Gods…"
    "Many-Named, Holy of Form…"
    "Many-Named, Holy of Form…"
    "Lady of Secret Rites in Thy Temple…"
    "Lady of Secret Rites in Thy Temple…"
    By the time supper was served, a frugal meal of bread, fruit, and water, they
    had gone through the chants for Dawn, the First Hour after Dawn, the Third Hour,
    the Hour of the Sun at Zenith, the Ninth Hour, the Hour When the Sun Embraces
    the Sacred Peak, and the Second Hour of Darkness. Mikayla no longer wondered why
    all the Daughters spoke in unison; she thought it would be a good deal more
    remarkable if they did not.
    While the Daughters ate, the Eldest Daughter read a long and boring story about
    a simple farmer whose volumnial was unjustly taken from him by a dishonest
    steward. When the farmer took his case before the magistrate, the magistrate was
    so impressed by the farmer's elegantly expressed arguments that he dragged the
    case out for more than nine sittings of his court so that he could listen to the
    eloquence of the farmer.
    Finally the magistrate decided in the farmer's favor, so that justice was done
    in the end, but Mikayla noticed that the end was a very long way from the
    beginning. My father would have settled this case at the first hearing, she
    thought. Any sensible person would have.
    "Tell me, Youngest Sister, what do we learn from this story?"
    For one horrible moment Mikayla thought that the Eldest Daughter was addressing
    her. Then one of the other Daughters answered, and Mikayla realized that
    "Youngest Sister" must be some sort of honorary title, for the girl answering
    was obviously not the youngest of the other Daughters.
    "We learn the value of silence, and of simplicity of speech when speech is
    necessary," the girl replied. "If the farmer had not been so eloquent, his case
    would have been settled at its first hearing. The grandeur of his words cost him
    much."
    About a year of his life at least, Mikayla thought, and maybe more, depending on
    how often the magistrate sat in judgment.
    There was the sound of a gong being struck somewhere off toward the main part of
    the Temple. The Daughters rose smoothly from their stools around the table in
    unison; Mikayla scrambled awkwardly from hers a beat afterward, but managed to
    push her stool under the table at the same time as the rest of the girls.
    The Eldest Daughter smiled kindly at her. "It is time for the ritual of the
    Second Hour of Darkness, Younger Sister," she said, "but you need not attend it
    tonight. You will have time to become more familiar with the rituals before you
    are expected to take part in them. You may go to bed now."
    "Thank you, Eldest Sister," Mikayla said with sincere gratitude. The Daughters
    fell into line behind the Eldest Daughter and passed beyond the curtain,
    beginning to chant softly as they went through the antechamber.
    Mikayla went to her room, changed into a night robe she found in the clothing
    chest. The night robe was almost as heavy as the daytime clothing, but given the
    cold air surrounding her, Mikayla was glad of it. She climbed into bed and
    pulled the sphere out from under her clothing. Fiolon's face appeared in it
    almost immediately.
    "Mika, are you all right?"
    "Yes, I'm fine," Mikayla assured him. "You'd love this place; they're teaching
    me to sing. So far we've studied seven musical services, and those are just the
    everyday ones. They probably have a lot of special ones for holidays and
    festivals."
    "I was watching when that Timon tried to kiss you," Fiolon said grimly, "but
    when the priest took you away I couldn't see you anymore."
    "You didn't see their library, then?" Mikayla asked. "That's a shame; they have
    more books and scrolls than the Citadel and the Archimage put together. You
    don't need to worry about Timon; he won't get near me again. They've put me in
    with the Daughters of the Goddess, so I'll be so well chaperoned that even
    Haramis couldn't complain. And how is Haramis?"
    Fiolon shrugged and spread his hands helplessly. "About the same. When are you
    coming back?"
    "Seventy days from now. That's when the new body will be ready."
    Fiolon looked at her in surprise and delight. "They can do it, and they agreed?"
    "Yes," Mikayla said, smiling. "Finally I'm doing something right. It's a
    wonderful feeling-especially after two years of living with Haramis!"
    Fiolon looked concerned. "What do they want in exchange for the body?"
    "What I'm doing now," Mikayla assured him. "They just want me to be one of the
    Daughters of the Goddess for a while."
    "That doesn't sound too dangerous," Fiolon said. "But if anything goes wrong,
    summon a lammergeier and get out of there, all right?"
    "I will," Mikayla said reassuringly. "But I don't think anything is going to go
    wrong. The people here all seem very nice-except for Timon, and he has been
    ordered to leave me alone."
    "Do you think he'll obey that order?" Fiolon asked anxiously.
    "Don't worry about that," Mikayla said. "I'm sure he will. The Husband of the
    Goddess is a kind man, but he's not someone you disobey."
    "Be careful, Mika."
    "I will be. Don't worry." Mikayla yawned. "I'm going to sleep. It's been a long
    day. Give my love to Uzun. Good night, Fio."
    "Good night, Mika. Sleep well."
    Mikayla stuffed the sphere back into the front of her night robe. "I'll probably
    chant in my sleep," she muttered as she lay down and pulled the blanket over
    her.
    The chiming of a bell in the main room woke Mikayla shortly before dawn. She
    hastily got up, washed, and dressed in one of the heavy white robes, making
    certain that the sphere and its ribbon were hidden. Then she went into the main
    room. The other Daughters were there already, and Mikayla was glad to see that
    they were dressed as she was.
    I guess I picked the right outfit, she thought with some satisfaction. So far,
    so good.
    The Eldest Daughter walked over to her and whispered in her ear. "We do not
    speak until after the ritual of the First Hour. Follow us to the chapel and take
    your place with us, but do not sing until I give you permission."
    Mikayla nodded silently and fell in at the end of the line as the Daughters went
    through the curtain. Their place in the chapel turned out to be a bench off to
    one side of the dais where she had first seen the Husband of the Goddess. There
    was a curtain between their bench and the rest of the room so that they could
    not be seen by the congregation. Remembering the way Timon had looked at her the
    day before, Mikayla was just as glad of that.
    The Husband of the Goddess entered from the other side of the room, robed in
    black and wearing the gold mask. The Eldest Daughter picked up her mask from a
    shelf under the bench, put it on, and went to join him. They started the chant,
    and the Daughters and the congregation joined in. Mikayla clamped her jaws
    together to keep herself from singing along.
    Hail to you, O Meret,
    Lady of Eternity, Queen of Gods,
    Many-Named, Holy of Form,
    Lady of Secret Rites in Thy Temple.
    Noble of Spirit Thou presides! in Derorguila,
    Thou art rich in grain in Labomok.
    Lady of memory in the Court of Justice,
    Hidden spirit of the caverns,
    Holy in the caves of ice,
    The Sacred Peak is thy body,
    The River Noku thy blood…
    The chanting went on for about half an hour, and Mikayla soon realized that she
    didn't remember even half the words. And when the chant started to repeat and
    the Daughters changed from melody to the descant in a different language,
    Mikayla was completely lost. They hadn't even begun to teach her this part.
    By the Flower, she thought, I have a great deal to team before I can even begin
    to function as one of the Daughters. I only hope I can do it. One side effect of
    her insecurity, however, was that she was not going into trance as she had the
    day before. She wasn't sure whether that was good or bad. It was certainly an
    uncomfortable feeling, sitting there and trying to hear and remember all the
    words and the tones that went with them. Slipping back into trance would have
    made all her nervousness go away, but then she might forget and start singing,
    and then they'd be angry with her. She definitely didn't want that to happen.
    Finally they reached a point that Mikayla recognized as the end of the Dawn
    ritual. She tensed in her position on the end of the bench, getting ready to
    move when the other Daughters did. But the only person who moved was the Eldest
    Daughter, who came back behind the curtain and sat down on the far end of the
    bench from Mikayla. Mikayla peeked at her along the line of bodies and noticed
    that she wasn't even taking her mask off. The Daughters all sat still with their
    eyes cast down to their laps, where their hands were clasped. Mikayla imitated
    their position and waited for something to happen.
    After a period of silence that seemed endless to Mikayla, the Eldest Daughter
    got up again and rejoined the Husband of the Goddess on the dais. Another round
    of chanting began, and after a few moments Mikayla recognized it as the ritual
    for the First Hour after Sunrise.
    Oh, she realized. There's so little time between the two rituals that everyone
    just stays here. She tried to remember how long the First Hour ritual took. I
    think it's a bit shorter than the Dawn ritual, but that may be wishful thinking.
    I just hope that we get breakfast when this is over. I'm starving.
    Finally the ritual came to an end, the Eldest Daughter returned to the bench and
    replaced her mask, and then led the Daughters back to their quarters. To
    Mikayla's relief, there was breakfast on the table. It was bread and fruit, with
    water to drink, but at least there was plenty of food, and her new Sisters kept
    passing it to her, so she got enough to eat.
    After breakfast everyone remained at the table for a discussion of the day's
    schedule. "He Who Causes to Live wishes to speak to our new Sister this
    morning," the Eldest Daughter announced. "You two"-she indicated the two girls
    sitting next to Mikayla- "will accompany her to his workroom after the Third
    Hour." Both girls nodded, and Mikayla followed their example.
    She assumed that by "after the third hour" the priestess meant after the
    relevant ritual, and by now Mikayla was figuring out her place in the scheme of
    things. All I have to do is keep my mouth shut and follow my Sisters, and I
    should stay out of trouble-probably for the first time in my life. And I think I
    can actually do this. It's a very strange feeling not to have anyone scolding me
    or disapproving of me. I think I like it.
    "Until the third hour, we will work on the Dawn Chant again," the Eldest
    Daughter announced. The girls all moved to their places on the bench by the fire
    and started the chant again. This time they all sang it together, section by
    section, and Mikayla could feel it sinking into her mind.
    I'll learn all of this yet, she thought with satisfaction. I'm not stupid and
    hopeless after all.
    The workroom of He Who Causes to Live was one of the most fascinating places
    that Mikayla had ever seen. One entire wall was covered with bins containing
    more types of wood than she had ever known existed. Another wall had a board
    with all sorts of tools hooked to it. Briefly Mikayla regretted being stuck with
    the Daughters; being apprenticed to this man looked like a very interesting job.
    He Who Causes to Live was a comparatively young man compared with the Husband of
    the Goddess; he was only in early middle age. But Mikayla noted as he set a
    stool for her next to his workbench that he had the hands of someone who had
    been working with them for a long time. The other two Daughters sat side by side
    on a bench near the door of the workroom, where they could watch Mikayla but not
    hear the conversation as long as Mikayla and He Who Causes to Live kept their
    voices low.
    "I understand I'm to make a new body for an effective spirit," the man began.
    "What does the body need to be able to do?"
    Mikayla concentrated, wanting to be sure that she didn't leave anything
    out-especially something important. "It needs sight, hearing, speech, and the
    ability to move, including the ability to climb and descend stairs. It has to be
    able to tolerate extreme cold, such as the temperatures in an ice cave or on the
    back of a lammergeier flying above the mountains. And it needs to be able to
    tell when something is about to damage it."
    "Sounds like it almost needs to be human," the man remarked, scribbling notes on
    a scrap of parchment. "What about the ability to eat and drink?"
    "If that's what it needs to maintain the body, it will need them. But it hasn't
    eaten or drunk in nearly two hundreds now." Mikayla smiled briefly. "And he
    hasn't been complaining about the lack of food."
    "I hear he's been a harp?" the man asked, apparently not quite ready to believe
    this.
    "Yes, that is true," Mikayla replied calmly.
    "Incredible," He Who Causes to Live murmured. "What about sex?"
    "He's male."
    "No, I mean does he need to function sexually?"
    Mikayla stared at him for a moment in shock, and then visualized Haramis's
    probable reaction to that. "I don't think that would be a very good idea," she
    choked out. "The Lady wouldn't like it, and besides, everyone else he ever knew
    has been dead for a long time."
    "Very well." He Who Causes to Live made another note. "Now, what is this body
    supposed to look like?"
    "Oh dear." Mikayla chewed on her bottom lip. "I don't know what he looked like;
    he was turned into a harp long before I was born. He was a Nyssomu, if that's
    any help."
    "It will do for a start," the man said. "I can begin work with what you've given
    me." He handed her a piece of parchment and a burned stick. "But it would be
    helpful if, sometime in the next few days, you could draw me a sketch of what
    he's supposed to look like, particularly the head and face. Faces are
    important."
    "I'll do my best," Mikayla said. Maybe Fiolon will be able to get a description
    from Uzun.
    "One more thing I need," said He Who Causes to Live, lowering his voice even
    further. "I need his true name."
    "Uzun," Mikayla whispered.
    He Who Causes to Live stood, and Mikayla followed his example. "Thank you,
    Daughter of the Goddess," he said formally. "I shall begin work at once."
    "Thank you," Mikayla said, smiling shyly at him before turning to follow the
    other two Daughters back to their quarters.
    * * *
    The rest of the day alternated between attendance at the rituals and studying
    the chants for them. Luncheon was after the ritual of the Hour of the Sun at
    Zenith, and dinner was after the Hour When the Sun Embraces the Peak. Apparently
    servants came in to clean while the Daughters were at rituals, for although
    Mikayla didn't see any servants, the dirty dishes disappeared, the floors were
    swept, the fire in the main room was kept burning, and the washbasin in her room
    was emptied and the pitcher filled with fresh water.
    There was a break after the ritual of the Ninth Hour when the Daughters went to
    a bathing chamber, a room with thick woven carpets covering the floor, with a
    small hot spring in the center of it, where they bathed and washed their hair.
    Mikayla carefully concealed her sphere inside the clean robe she had brought
    with her and put it back on when she dressed again.
    But it was a long day, and by the end of dinner Mikayla was having difficulty
    sitting up straight. She envied the other Daughters their seemingly effortless
    perfect posture.
    When the Eldest Daughter excused her from the Second Hour of Darkness ritual,
    Mikayla could have wept in relief. Instead she thanked her gravely and retired
    to her room. She wanted nothing more than to crawl into bed and sleep, but the
    parchment that He Who Causes to Live had given her earlier was propped up next
    to the washbasin. She put on her night robe, pulled out her sphere, and bespoke
    Fiolon.
    "You look awful!" he exclaimed.
    "I'm all right," Mikayla said wearily, "just very tired. Fio, I need to know
    what Uzun's body is supposed to look like; the man who is making it wants a
    drawing, especially of the face. Can you get a description from Uzun?"
    "I can do better than that," Fiolon said enthusiastically. "I found something
    interesting in the mirror today. Did you know that it keeps images it has
    displayed?"
    "No, I didn't know," Mikayla said. "How does that help?"
    Fiolon was donning heavy clothing and pulling on his boots. "Orogastus used it
    to spy on the princesses, remember? And Uzun was with Haramis for part of her
    journey."
    "Oh!" Mikayla exclaimed. "Do you mean that the mirror has a picture of Uzun?"
    "Several of them," Fiolon assured her.
    "That should help," Mikayla said, watching the walls flash by as Fiolon ran down
    the stairs. "I wish you were here, though; you draw so much better than I do."
    Fiolon cut across the storeroom into the ice caves and entered the room with the
    mirror. It took him only a few seconds to call up the image he wanted.
    In the mirror Uzun stood in front of Haramis. He was short; his chin was at the
    same height as her waist. His head was round and his eyes were a dark yellow
    color, almost amber. He had a wide mouth, with small sharp teeth, and an
    extremely short nose, but his upright ears, their points sticking out through
    his silky pale hair, were long enough to make up for the shortness of his nose.
    As Mikayla watched the image the ears swiveled back and forth, obviously trying
    to locate some sound only Uzun could hear.
    Mikayla giggled. "He was cute," she said, reaching for the parchment and the
    charcoal stick. "Now if I can just get this on parchment…"
    "Link with me," Fiolon said, "and I'll draw it for you."
    "Can you?" Mikayla asked.
    "I think so," Fiolon said, "and it's worth a try. Just sit back against the
    wall, hold the stick and the parchment, close your eyes, and relax."
    Mikayla did as he said. She was so tired it was easy to relax; she was almost
    falling asleep. But she jerked suddenly awake when her hand started to move.
    "Stop fighting me," Fiolon said. "Your hand is going to move; it's the only way
    to draw. Just relax and let me move it for you."
    "I'm sorry," Mikayla apologized. "I was just startled, that's all. Try it
    again." She sagged back against the wall, closed her eyes, and ignored what her
    body was doing. She was about three parts asleep when Fiolon's voice pulled her
    out of it.
    "Mika, wake up!" She blinked and looked down at the parchment in her lap. It
    contained a very good likeness of Master Uzun as seen in the magic mirror. "How
    does it look?"
    "Perfect." Mikayla swallowed a yawn. "Thank you, Fio; I never could have done
    anywhere near so good a job."
    "You're welcome, Mika. Now put that someplace safe and go to bed. Good night."
    "G'night," Mikayla said sleepily. She shoved the sphere back under her robe, put
    the parchment inside her clothing chest, got into bed, and fell asleep as soon
    as she lay down.
    Chapter Seventeen
    Seventy days went by much faster than Mikayla had expected. She was so busy
    studying that she didn't even notice when her fifteenth birthday passed. By the
    time Uzun's new body was ready, she knew all the daily chants in both languages,
    and nearly all of the festival ones. For the last thirty days she had been
    allowed to take part in all of the daily rituals, including the Second Hour of
    Darkness. This meant that she couldn't bespeak Fiolon, since now she was never
    alone, but she reasoned, when she thought of it at all, that he could see her in
    the mirror if he wanted to.
    But finally the body was ready, and the Husband of the Goddess Meret summoned
    her to the library. "You have studied hard and have served the Goddess
    faithfully," he told her. "We are pleased with your progress." The Eldest
    Daughter of the Goddess Meret, who had accompanied Mikayla, nodded agreement.
    "Thank you, my Father," Mikayla replied respectfully.
    He handed her a scroll. "This contains the instructions for bringing the body to
    life and placing the effective spirit into it.
    The body has been packed." He indicated a bundle on the bench just inside the
    door. "Do you have a way to transport it?"
    Mikayla cast out with her mind, quickly locating the nearest lammergeier. "Yes,
    Father."
    "Are you ready to leave now?"
    "Yes, my Father. Thank you for all you have done for me. And thank you also,
    Eldest Sister."
    "Remember that you are to return in the spring," the priestess reminded her.
    "I remember," Mikayla assured them. "And I keep my promises."
    "Good," the priest remarked. "We expect that of our Daughters."
    Together the three of them walked through the main Temple into the hall of
    columns. Mikayla carried the package with Uzun's body, which was more awkward
    and bulky than it was heavy.
    "Holy Meret!" the Daughter gasped, seeing the shape perched by the outer
    pillars. "Where did that come from?"
    "The lammergeier?" Mikayla asked. "I called it, Eldest Sister. It has come to
    take me home."
    "Go with our blessings," the priest said, laying his hand briefly on Mikayla's
    head, "but remember that this is also your home."
    "I shall remember," Mikayla said. "I'll be back in a few months anyway." She
    smiled up at him. "You'll barely have time to miss me." She put Uzun's body
    carefully onto the bird's back and climbed up behind it, holding it in place
    with her body and carefully clutching the scroll in one hand. "Be well," she
    said.
    "Fare well," the Husband and Daughter replied in unison, "and return to us at
    the appointed time."
    The lammergeier dropped her on the Tower balcony less than an hour later.
    Mikayla thanked it and dragged Uzun's body indoors as the bird launched itself
    skyward again.
    "Fiolon?" she called. "Where are you?" There was no answer, so Mikayla dragged
    the body down the stairs to the study, hoping that He Who Causes to Live had
    packed it securely. Of course, she was pretty sure he had; he was definitely a
    man who took pride in his work.
    "Who's there?" the harp asked sharply as she dragged the package into the study.
    "It's Mikayla, Uzun," she replied, "and I've brought your new body with me." She
    set the body flat on the floor and carefully put the scroll on a shelf behind a
    pile of books so that it wouldn't roll off.
    "Thanks be to the Lords of the Air that you are safe!" Uzun exclaimed.
    "Why wouldn't I be safe?" Mikayla asked. "I've spent the past seventy days shut
    up with the Temple virgins, and the most strenuous thing I've been doing is
    singing." She stretched, noticing that quite a few of her muscles had stiffened
    up during the ride home. She also noticed that her feet were cold.
    Looking down, she saw that she was still wearing the sandals and robe of a
    Daughter of the Goddess Meret. "Please excuse me, Uzun," she said. "I need to
    take a hot bath and put some warmer clothes on. I'd forgotten how cold it is on
    the back of a lammergeier."
    "Of course, Princess," Uzun said. "Go and thaw out. It's good to have you back."
    "It's great to have you back," Fiolon's voice came from the doorway, "but you
    had better thaw out quickly-and change out of those clothes. Haramis is on her
    way home."
    Mikayla looked at him in horror. "By lammergeier?"
    "No, by fronial, but she'll be here within the hour."
    Mikayla fled the room. Behind her she could hear Fiolon start to explain to Uzun
    why it had taken him so long to notice Haramis's approach, but Mikayla knew it
    was more urgent for her to be properly dressed, with nothing to indicate that
    she had ever left the Tower, before Haramis arrived.
    Mikayla took the quickest bath of her life, hid her clothing from the Temple
    under the bottom of her mattress, and changed into one of the light tunics
    Haramis had had made for her. It was noticeably shorter than she remembered it;
    apparently she had grown a bit taller while she was at the Temple. She hoped
    that Haramis would be too tired to notice such details.
    When she returned to the study, Uzun and Fiolon were still discussing Haramis's
    imminent return.
    "Yes," Fiolon agreed, "I should have been keeping a closer watch on her. But she
    was making a good recovery, and I discovered the system the Vanished Ones used
    for musical notation about two weeks ago. You were as excited about it as I was,
    Uzun," he pointed out, "so surely you can understand how I failed to notice that
    she had started the journey home."
    Mikayla tried and failed to stifle a giggle. "I can understand it perfectly,"
    she said.
    "We have failed her," Uzun said mournfully. "We should never have allowed
    ourselves to be distracted from her welfare."
    "Is there anything wrong with her?" Mikayla asked.
    "Mika, she's had a brainstorm!" Fiolon reproved her.
    "I know that," Mikayla pointed out. "She had it before I left, remember? But if
    my parents let her travel, she must be much better, and I doubt if they sent her
    without an escort. So unless you saw her buried under a rock slide or some
    similar disaster, I don't see what the problem is."
    "We should have known she was coming," Uzun repeated stubbornly.
    Mikayla ignored him. "How many folk are in her party, Fiolon?"
    "Three," Fiolon replied. "She's in a litter slung between two fronials, and
    there are two women with her-both human," he added.
    "They would tolerate the cold better," Mikayla said absently. "I'll tell Enya to
    have rooms made ready." She tugged on the bellpull to summon the housekeeper.
    "There is one problem," Fiolon said. "How are they going to get across the
    chasm?"
    "Oh dear," Mikayla said. "You're right. She left by lammergeier, so that silver
    pipe she uses to extend the bridge is probably somewhere in her room. And this
    is not a good time to tear her room apart looking for it. Maybe there's another
    way to extend the bridge. Enya might know."
    Enya, arriving at that point, did indeed know. "There's a device in the
    gatehouse. Get one of the Vispi to show you." She reckoned on her fingers. "The
    Lady, you, Lord Fiolon, and two more humans-that's five for dinner." She looked
    without favor at the large package in the middle of the floor. "I don't know
    what that is, but I suggest that you get it out of here before dinnertime. And
    speaking of time, Princess"-she fixed Mikayla with a stern look-"where have you
    been the past few months? I'm sure the Lady will want to know."
    "I was at the Temple of Meret, on the far side of-
    "Silence!" Enya cut her off, her fingers making the gesture the Nyssomu used to
    ward off great evil. "Do not speak that name again; it is a Dark place."
    "Most caves carved into a mountain side are dark," Mikayla said calmly. "And I
    certainly don't expect you to lie to the Lady. Tell her anything that you think
    an elderly woman too ill to ride even a fronial should know."
    Enya frowned, and Mikayla was suddenly sure that Haramis wasn't going to hear
    about her absence from any of the servants. "I'm sure you've kept the Lady's
    room ready against the day of her return," Mikayla continued, "but we'll be
    needing rooms for the two women with her."
    "How do you know there are only two?" Enya asked suspiciously.
    "By scrying," Mikayla replied.
    "Hmmph." The Oddling woman left to go about her duties.
    Mikayla looked at Fiolon and sighed. "I wasn't trying to take credit for your
    work, Fio…"
    Fiolon shook his head. "No matter. The less said about any recent events, the
    better. Let's wait until we see what sort of condition Haramis is in."
    "That's the most sensible thing you've said all evening," Uzun said sharply.
    "And if the thing Enya was telling you to get out of the way before dinnertime
    is my new body, I suggest that you do so. The Lady is likely to be shocked
    enough to find Fiolon here without adding any more surprises."
    Mikayla grinned. "I can just imagine her reaction to coming in to find us in the
    middle of the ritual to put you into a new body. Besides, I haven't had time to
    read all the instructions for the ritual yet, and it's probably very long and
    complicated."
    "What shall we do with it?" Fiolon regarded the package dubiously. "It's awfully
    large."
    "It's not heavy," Mikayla assured him. "A lot of it is packing material to
    protect the body from damage. He Who Causes to Live spent seventy days making
    it, so you can believe that he packed it very carefully before he handed it over
    to me to be brought here on the back of a lammergeier. We could probably throw
    it off the balcony without harming it."
    "I don't think I want to try that," Fiolon said.
    "I know I don't," Mikayla agreed, "but if you take one end and I take the other,
    we can take it downstairs on our way to extend the bridge for Haramis and her
    party." She bent and grabbed one end of the box. After a second Fiolon picked up
    the other, and they maneuvered it into the hall and started down the stairs.
    "Where are we going to put it?" Fiolon asked.
    "I think we'd best put it with the devices of the Vanished Ones, and if we can
    hide it behind a few other boxes, so much the better." Mikayla frowned. "I'm not
    sure how Haramis is going to take the idea of giving Uzun a new body, so it's
    much better if she can't find it."
    "But surely she couldn't be so selfish as to wish him confined to that harp
    forever!" Fiolon protested.
    "Have you ever known Haramis to be unselfish?"
    "In the old ballads-"
    "No, not when she was a girl. Now, since you've met her."
    Fiolon was silent for the rest of the trip down the stairs, and when they
    reached the storage area he led the way to the darkest corner and stacked enough
    boxes and barrels in front of the body so that it wasn't visible from any angle.
    "Very good,'" Mikayla said, surveying his work approvingly. "You've even left
    undisturbed dust on the tops of the barrels."
    "Let's go find the device that extends the bridge," Fiolon said. "The Lady
    should be here anytime now."
    Mikayla followed him in silence to the gatehouse. Obviously Fiolon didn't want
    to admit that Haramis, Crown Princess and Archimage, heroine of so many of his
    favorite ballads, was less than perfect.
    And as long as he doesn't insist on behaving as if she were, she thought, I'm
    not going to make him admit out loud that she isn't.
    Chapter Eighteen
    The device that controlled the bridge was obvious as soon as one looked for it.
    It was mounted on the wall at about shoulder height. Mikayla pressed it, and she
    and Fiolon went out on the plaza to watch for Haramis's arrival. The sun was
    dropping fast, and the evening breeze was springing up, but the solar cell that
    made up the plaza was still warm underfoot. Mikayla realized that she didn't
    feel cold, even in her light indoor robe and house slippers. Fiolon, who had
    grabbed a short cloak on his way through the storage room, looked at her in
    surprise. "Aren't you freezing?" he asked.
    "No." Mikayla shook her head. "I just realized that I seem to have adapted to
    colder temperatures during my time at the Temple. It's quite cold there, but
    after a while I stopped noticing. I was cold when I got off the lammergeier, but
    we were a good deal higher than this. I'm warm enough here. Perhaps the heat
    from the solar cell is enough for me."
    Fiolon shaded his eyes and looked toward the approach to the bridge. "There they
    are," he said.
    Mikayla watched as the fronials approached the bridge and stepped onto it
    without so much as a quiver. "Those are the Archimage's fronials, all right,"
    she remarked. "You couldn't get an ordinary fronial on that bridge without
    blindfolding it and coaxing it every step of the way." She giggled softly. "That
    guardswoman on the first fronial looks more nervous than it does."
    "There," Fiolon said with satisfaction. "They're all safely across. I'll go
    retract the bridge."
    Mikayla smiled, perfectly able to understand his desire not to greet the
    Archimage at the moment. "I'll go welcome her home," she said, crossing the
    plaza toward the party.
    The guard on the first fronial had dismounted, as had the woman bringing up the
    rear. "Princess Mikayla," the guard greeted her.
    Mikayla quickly racked her brain for the proper name. "Guardswoman Nella," she
    said. "Be welcome to the Lady's Tower. The servants will be out to take the
    fronials in a minute." She nodded to the other woman, whom she recognized as one
    of the Queen's ladies who had some skill in herb lore. "Lady Bevis, be welcome.
    How is the Lady?" She looked anxiously at Haramis, who seemed asleep.
    "Well enough," Lady Bevis assured her, "but it has been a long trip. She should
    be put to bed as soon as possible. Where is her room?"
    Mikayla indicated the Tower looming above them. "About two thirds of the way up,
    I'm afraid." Both Nella and Lady Bevis looked appalled.
    Haramis woke and looked around, frowning as she tried to figure out where she
    was now. It had been a long, tiring, and confusing trip, and all she wanted was
    to be home in her own bed. She looked up at the Tower. "Good," she said. "We're
    home." Then she looked around and frowned. Something was different. "What
    happened to the plaza? It should be white."
    "The snow melted, Lady," Mikayla said respectfully.
    "Oh." Haramis was confused. The snow had never melted on the plaza in all the
    time she had been there. Probably the child had done something to it. She glared
    at Mikayla. "Are you planning to keep us standing here all night?" she snapped.
    From what she remembered of that wretched brat, she probably was.
    "No, Lady," the girl said. "We were trying to think how best to get you to your
    room. There are rather a lot of stairs to climb," she added in apologetic tones.
    She seems to have learned some manners at long last, Haramis thought with
    satisfaction. I must remember to thank Uzun.
    "So call some of my servants!" she snapped.
    Mikayla smiled faintly. "Yes, Lady," she murmured, bowing her head briefly.
    Three lammergeiers swooped down to the plaza. One landed, but the other two
    hovered while Mikayla unhooked the litter from the rear fronial and passed the
    carrying straps to one of the great birds. Nella hesitantly followed her example
    with the front end of the litter, looking up at the bird with some awe.
    Obviously she had never been this close to one before.
    The fronials just stood there, as if this were an everyday occurrence. Haramis
    wondered a bit at that. Certainly she had put time and effort into training each
    generation of fronials, but she had not realized that she had trained them quite
    this well.
    The birds flapped their great wings in unison, carrying her smoothly toward the
    balcony. A few seconds later the third bird, with Mikayla on its back, swept
    past her to set the girl on the balcony. By the time the birds gently lowered
    the litter, one of Haramis's Vispi servants was there to take an end of it.
    Mikayla took the other, and between them they carried it carefully to Haramis's
    bedchamber, where Enya was waiting to put Haramis to bed.
    Haramis stifled a sigh of relief when she was finally settled in. At last I'm
    home. I don't have to move anymore; I don't have to spend any more time being
    jolted over mountain paths between two fronials. I'm home. "Where's Uzun?" she
    asked. "Why hasn't he come up to see me?"
    Mikayla, who had been assisting Enya, looked uncomfortable. "He's in the study,
    Lady," she said. Haramis noticed that the girl seemed to be worried about
    something.
    "Doesn't he know I'm back?"
    "Yes, Lady," Mikayla assured her, "and I know that he's looking forward to
    seeing you when you are able to go downstairs."
    "Why doesn't he drag his lazy body up here?" Haramis demanded fretfully. Doesn't
    he realize how ill I've been?
    Enya muttered something about dinner and fled from the room, casting an anxious
    look at Haramis as she did so.
    What's the matter with her? Haramis wondered. Why is everyone acting so strange?
    "Lady," Mikayla said hesitantly, "have you forgotten that you turned Master Uzun
    into a harp? He can't climb stairs; he can't even move on his own."
    By the Flower, Haramis thought, I had forgotten that. But I'm not going to admit
    it and have them all treat me as if I were an idiot. "Well, have the servants
    bring him up here, then!" she snapped.
    "Right now, Lady?"
    "Yes, now!"
    "As you wish. Lady." Mikayla curtsied and left the room.
    Can't I get anything done here without an argument? Haramis wondered irritably.
    Her question was answered sometime later when she heard voices in the hall. Enya
    had brought her a light supper, and Lady Bevis was sitting with her while she
    ate. Her bedchamber door was open, so the comments coming from the hall were
    clearly audible.
    "I still don't think this is a good idea." The voice was that of a young man.
    Haramis didn't recognize it.
    "It is the Archimage's specific order," Mikayla said, in tones that suggested
    that she agreed with the first speaker.
    "We got it up the stairs without its hitting anything." That was the guard the
    King had sent with Haramis-what was her name? Oh yes, Nella, or something like
    that. "Why should there be a problem?"
    "Harps are very delicate instruments," the young man said. "Master Uzun hasn't
    been moved from his place in the study for many years. I am afraid that
    subjecting him to the change in temperature and humidity involved in moving him
    to the Lady's bedchamber may damage him."
    "I don't care if it does." That voice must be Uzun's, Haramis realized; it had
    the sound of harp strings. It was followed by a sudden thud.
    "Careful!" three voices snapped in unison: two human and one harp.
    Nella's voice said, "I'm sorry; nobody warned me that it talked."
    "And you're already out of tune, Uzun," the young man remarked. "I told you it
    was too cold in the hallways."
    "You can retune me when we get to the Lady's room," Uzun said calmly.
    By now, even Haramis could tell he was out of tune. That clumsy guard must have
    dropped him.
    "My place is with the Lady," Uzun continued, "no matter what happens." Haramis
    had a vague memory-or was it a dream?- of being in the mountains with Uzun when
    he was still a Nyssomu and seeing him freeze, almost to the point of death.
    Three weary-looking humans dragged the harp into the room. "Here he is, Lady,"
    Mikayla said. "Where do you want him?"
    Haramis turned her head to the right. "Next to the head of my bed," she replied.
    "But that's right next to the heating grille," the young man protested.
    "Excessive heat could crack the frame."
    "He's been near the fire for years!" Mikayla protested.
    "Near it, not directly in front of it!"
    "Enough!" Haramis snapped. "I'm tired of listening to your bickering. Put him
    there, tune him, and leave us!"
    "Yes, Lady." Mikayla sighed. Carefully they set the harp in place.
    The young man pulled a tuning key out of his belt and carefully began to retune
    the strings. Haramis frowned, trying to place him. He looked familiar, but she
    didn't remember him as being one of her servants; in fact, she didn't think she
    had human servants. But Mikayla was ordering him around as if he were one. Had
    Mikayla acquired more servants while Haramis had been away?
    How long have I been away? I'll ask Uzun when we're alone.
    It seemed to take forever, but finally Uzun was back in tune. "Leave us, all of
    you," Haramis commanded.
    Nella bowed and left the room quickly; she had been hovering by the door looking
    as if she wished to be elsewhere the entire time. Lady Bevis picked up Haramis's
    empty tray, curtsied, and withdrew gracefully. Mikayla paused to pat the frame
    of the harp briefly, then started to follow Lady Bevis, but paused in the
    doorway, obviously waiting for the young man. He ran a hand down Uzun's
    forepillar, frowned in concern, and whispered, "I'm sorry, Uzun." Then he joined
    Mikayla in the doorway and they left together.
    "Who is he?" Haramis asked Uzun irritably. "Has that girl been hiring more
    servants while I've been gone? How long have I been gone anyway? And has she
    made any progress at all in her lessons?"
    "My heart rejoices in your safe return, Lady," Master Uzun replied. "I feared I
    might never see you again-not that I can see you in this form-but I feared never
    to hear your voice again."
    "I'm glad to see you, too, oldest of my friends," Haramis said, momentarily
    disarmed. "But tell me, what has been going on in my absence?"
    "Not much," Uzun replied. "I have been tutoring the Princess Mikayla in magic,
    and she has made good progress. She has now read every book in your library, and
    is quite proficient in scrying. I had her practice by checking to see how you
    were doing every few days."
    "So that's how she knew to be there to extend the bridge," Haramis mused. "And
    can she call the lammergeiers as well?"
    "Yes, I'm fairly certain that she can."
    "She seems to have outgrown that case of the sulks she developed after Fiolon
    left…" Haramis's voice trailed off as she suddenly realized who the young man
    was. "That was Fiolon, wasn't it?" she demanded. "What is he doing back here?"
    "You may remember," Uzun said hesitantly, "that right before you took ill, Lord
    Fiolon inadvertently caused it to snow at the Citadel."
    "Yes, I do remember that." It was all coming back to Haramis now. "They were
    bonded together, and Mikayla was playing with weather magic-and by now, I
    suppose they're permanently bonded! How could you let this happen?" she demanded
    furiously.
    "Mikayla is still a virgin," Uzun said firmly, "and I'm fairly sure that Fiolon
    is as well. Their bond is emotional, not physical, and had been well established
    for about five years before your ill-advised attempt to sever it."
    Haramis gasped. No one had dared speak to her so in almost two hundreds.
    "The bond was reestablished within ten hours," Uzun continued, "but from the
    descriptions both children gave of the pain involved it was clear that it did
    not involve the lower centers at all. I don't think you could have severed it
    permanently without their full cooperation then, and now I'm quite sure you
    can't. You've been gone over a year and a half, and I've been training both of
    them."
    "You've been training that boy?" Haramis exclaimed in horror. "Have you lost
    your mind? Do you want another Orogastus running loose?"
    "Lord Fiolon is nothing at all like Orogastus," Uzun said firmly. "And a child,
    which is what he was then, with a little knowledge of weather magic and no
    control over it is very dangerous. He needed to be trained, for the safety of
    everyone around him, and for the sake of the land."
    "And so you took it upon yourself to train him, in my home, without my consent."
    "Is this not my home as well?" Uzun said quietly. "And you were in no condition
    to give your consent; at first you did not even remember that either Fiolon or
    Mikayla existed. I did as I thought best, for them, and for the land. And now he
    is trained, and nothing can change what is."
    "Perhaps you are right," Haramis said grudgingly. "But he can't stay here. It
    isn't proper. He should not have been living here unchaperoned with the Princess
    Mikayla all this time."
    "It's not as if it were generally known," Uzun pointed out. "I'll bet no one at
    the Citadel even missed him. And now that you're here, they're not
    unchaperoned."
    "He's a distraction to her studies," Haramis said firmly. "He leaves tomorrow,
    and this time I'll summon a lammergeier and send him back to Var!"
    "You can summon the lammergeiers again?" Uzun said. "That is good news. When you
    were first ill, they could not bespeak you at all, and we were quite concerned
    about that."
    "We?" Haramis asked. She wasn't sure she could summon a lammergeier now, but she
    wasn't going to admit it.
    "Fiolon, Mikayla, and I," Uzun replied. "We didn't see any need to tell the
    servants just how ill you were."
    Since Haramis couldn't really remember exactly how ill she had been, she was
    just as glad to hear that her servants had not been gossiping about her health.
    She suddenly realized that she was very tired. "I'm going to sleep now, Uzun.
    Good night."
    "Good night, Lady," she heard him reply as she fell asleep. "Pleasant dreams."
    The next morning Haramis summoned Mikayla and Fiolon and announced her intention
    of sending Fiolon away at once.
    "But, Lady," Mikayla protested. "I need him to help me transfer Master Uzun to
    his new body. The spells are too complex for one person, and the process is long
    and complicated."
    "New body?" Haramis asked.
    Mikayla looked at Uzun. "You didn't tell her?"
    "What body I'm in isn't important as long as I'm with her," Uzun said quietly.
    Fiolon ran his hands over the harp's frame. "You won't last more than half a
    year in this form if you stay here in this room," he said in a tone of
    professional appraisal.
    "I'm sure I'll be up and about soon," Haramis said, "and we'll be able to move
    him back to the study."
    "All that does is buy him more time," Fiolon said firmly.
    "And it's very upsetting for him to be blind and immobile," Mikayla said. "He
    found it particularly distressing when you were ill at the Citadel and he
    couldn't even scry to see how you were. He had to depend on us to do it for him,
    and he couldn't even see what we saw-all he knew was what we could describe for
    him. He was really miserable."
    "It wasn't that bad," Uzun said.
    "Stop trying to spare her feelings," Mikayla snapped. "That wasn't what you were
    saying last year."
    Uzun would always try to spare my feelings, Haramis remembered. He always used
    to talk about dying in my service as his highest goal in life.
    "Where did you get a new body?" she asked. "And what is it like?"
    "It's Nyssomu in form, made of painted wood, with articulated joints," Mikayla
    replied. "He Who Causes to Live at the Temple of Meret made it. It looks as much
    like Uzun's old body as we could manage."
    Haramis felt her head beginning to ache. "I've never heard of the Temple of
    Meret. What is it?"
    "It's on the north side of Mount Gidris, opposite where you found your
    Talisman," Fiolon said helpfully.
    "Meret is a sort of Labornoki earth goddess," Mikayla said. "Mount Gidris is
    considered to be part of her body, and the River Noku is her blood, with which
    she nourishes the land."
    "They use blood magic?" Haramis asked sharply.
    "Only symbolically," Mikayla assured her.
    "I still don't like it," Haramis said. "You are not to do anything with this
    until I have had a chance to study it. And you don't need Fiolon; if I determine
    that this idea has merit, I shall do the ritual myself."
    Both young people looked appalled.
    "But you don't know the ritual!" Mikayla protested. "It took me months to learn
    even the simple daily rituals of the Goddess Meret."
    "I'm really concerned about the structural integrity of the harp," Fiolon added.
    "It need not concern you," Haramis informed him coldly. "You are going to Var,
    today. Go and pack whatever you can carry on a lammergeier." Fiolon didn't move;
    he and Mikayla both stared at Haramis in astonishment. "Go!" Haramis repeated.
    Fiolon looked at Mikayla, shrugged, and left the room.
    "You can't send him to Var!" Mikayla protested. "He hasn't been there since he
    was a small child. His home is here in Ruwenda."
    "Where he keeps sniffing around you as if you were in heat!" Haramis snapped. "I
    intend to send him as far away as possible; I won't have him distracting you
    further from your studies."
    "I learn better when he and I study together," Mikayla pointed out. "And we are
    not being unchaste, and your accusations are idiotic! Did Uzun not explain that
    to you-or did you not understand him?" Clearly the girl was furious, but Haramis
    couldn't imagine why.
    "He is obviously a bad influence on you," Haramis said coldly. "Your manners
    become atrocious as soon as he becomes the subject of conversation."
    "I happen to care about him," Mikayla said. "We have been best friends ever
    since we were small children. We were planning to marry, until you came along
    and spoiled that, but you can't expect my feelings for him to change just
    because you say I can't marry him."
    "I expect your feelings for him to change when he's far enough away from you,"
    Haramis informed her. "That's why I'm sending him to Var-obviously the Citadel
    isn't far enough away."
    "How are you going to get him to Var?" Mikayla asked.
    "She can summon a lammergeier," Uzun said. "She told me so last night."
    "She was mistaken, Uzun," Mikayla said gently. "They still can't reach her; I
    asked them this morning."
    "Then you will summon one for me," Haramis told her. "If you can talk to them."
    "I can talk to them," Mikayla said. "Who do you think had them carry you up here
    yesterday? But what makes you think I'll help you send Fiolon away?"
    "You seem to be forgetting, girl, that this is my home," Haramis pointed out.
    "Isn't it also Uzun's home?" Mikayla asked. "He invited Fiolon to stay here."
    "Yes, he told me that he wished to train Fiolon for a time." Haramis said, "but
    I believe that training is finished now, is it not, Uzun?"
    "He's not an inadvertent danger to himself and others anymore," Uzun admitted,
    sounding reluctant.
    Fiolon returned, carrying a small backpack and dressed for cold weather. "I'm
    ready to go to Var," he announced.
    "She can't send you," Mikayla told him smugly. Haramis wished that she were
    strong enough to smack the girl. "She still can't talk to the lammergeiers."
    "You can," Fiolon pointed out.
    "Why should I?"
    "Because I'm asking you," he said gently. "Don't be so worried, Mika; I'll be
    fine. I'm still the king's nephew, whatever else I may be." He drew her aside,
    held her gently with his hands on her shoulders, and spoke quietly to her for
    several minutes. Haramis strained unsuccessfully to hear what he was saying, and
    she couldn't see Mikayla's reaction because the girl's back was toward her.
    Fiolon's face gave nothing away until his last words. Apparently Mikayla had
    agreed to summon a lammergeier for him, for he smiled at her.
    Haramis felt a stab of envy; she couldn't recall that anyone had ever looked at
    her like that. There was so much love and acceptance in his face that Haramis
    was astonished. How can he care so much for that sulky, stubborn, little brat?
    Fiolon bent and kissed Mikayla lightly on the forehead. "You're not losing me,
    you know," he said. "You'll still see me in your mirror."
    Whatever does he mean by that? Haramis wondered.
    Mikayla clung to him, shaking, and buried her face in his shoulder. Fiolon
    wrapped his arms around her and held her until she composed herself. Then he
    released her and bowed to Haramis. "I thank you for your hospitality, Lady," he
    said politely.
    "I wish you a safe journey," Haramis responded automatically.
    Mikayla didn't turn or speak as she left the room with Fiolon, but a few minutes
    later Haramis heard the rush of wings as a lammergeier landed on the balcony,
    followed shortly by the sounds of the bird's departure.
    Mikayla did not return to Haramis's room. When Haramis asked where she was, Enya
    informed her that Mikayla had locked herself into her bedchamber and was not
    answering anyone who came to her door.
    Haramis sighed. "She's probably sulking again. Just leave her alone until she
    surfaces. No doubt she'll come out when she gets hungry." I swear by the Flower,
    the fronials are easier to train.
    Chapter Nineteen
    Mikayla watched as the great bird carried Fiolon away to the south. She could
    understand his not wanting to stay at the Tower now that Haramis was back. In
    the mood Haramis was in, Mikayla didn't want to be there either. That was the
    only reason she had agreed to summon a lammergeier to take Fiolon to Var-she
    certainly wasn't doing it as a favor to Haramis.
    She went to her room and locked herself in, then sat on her bed and pulled out
    her sphere from under her tunic. She called up Fiolon's image in it, but did not
    try to speak to him. She didn't wish to distract him while he was flying.
    She watched as the bird flew over the Thorny Hell, the Blackmire, and the
    Greenmire, crossed over the western half of the Tassaleyo Forest, and finally
    picked up the track of the Great Mutar River, which ran through Var to the
    Southern Sea. Fiolon directed the bird to bring him down on the west side of the
    river, about a league south of the border between Ruwenda and Var.
    He didn't need me to summon the lammergeier at all, Mikayla realized. He can
    bespeak them as well as I can.
    That was her last coherent thought for some time. As Fiolon slid from the bird's
    back and his feet touched the ground of Var, the world shifted around him and,
    through their link, around Mikayla as well. She fell backward on her bed like a
    rag doll as Fiolon sank to the ground. Both of them were helpless in the face of
    the sensations overwhelming Fiolon and, through him, Mikayla.
    It was as if the entire country of Var had reached out and seized Fiolon, as if
    the land were trying to take over his body. The rivers, most notably the Great
    Mutar, were replacing his blood, and the winds blowing in from the Southern Sea
    were becoming his breath, filling his lungs and spreading throughout his body.
    The day that their boat had capsized at the junction of the Golobar and Lower
    Mutar rivers was nothing compared with this.
    In spite of the fact that it was early winter, there was vegetation everywhere.
    It was not the wild growth of the great swamps of Ruwenda, but orderly,
    cultivated winter crops, not just in a band surrounding the Great Mutar, but
    spread out all over the country. The cultivated area occupied most of the land
    from the Tassaleyo Forest, which covered the border between Var and Ruwenda,
    almost all the way to the sea.
    Nothing had ever prepared Fiolon for the sea. More water than he had ever known
    existed splashed ashore all along the coast of Var. He felt as though part of
    his body was lying on the beach, being splashed by every incoming wave, at the
    same time that part of him held the Great Mutar River and part of him was the
    cultivated fields.
    Yet another part of him held the cities, small ones such as existed in Ruwenda,
    and the capital and main port city of Mutavari. He remembered, a very faint, dim
    memory from early childhood, living in Mutavari, but he didn't remember it as
    being so large or as having so many people. Ships were tied up all along the
    wharves that stretched out along both sides of the river, and people from all
    over the known world dashed back and forth, loading and unloading cargoes,
    running errands, making business deals… Fortunately, he wasn't linked with all
    of those people; being linked with the land was more than enough to try to cope
    with. But he could still feel minds in contact with his, even if they weren't
    those of the people he saw…
    "Mika?" His thought was faint, but Mikayla caught it easily. Whatever was
    happening to him was not enough to destroy their bond, even if both of them did
    feel as if their heads were about to split open and their bodies were much too
    small.
    "I'm here, Fio."
    "Do you hear them?"
    "The voices? Yes." Mikayla could hear wave after wave of something halfway
    between voices and thoughts. "They're not human-
    Both of them realized it at the same time. "-they're folk!"
    What would normally have been a dialogue between the two of them was now one
    chain of thought, with neither of them sure who was contributing which idea. Not
    that it mattered; in many ways it had never mattered to them who thought of
    what.
    "Not Nyssomu… nor Vispi… definitely not Skritek… but one of them is rather
    savage… one of them? Yes, that's right; there are two distinct groups… in Var,
    that would make them the Glismak-they'd be the savage ones… and the Wyvilo."
    "But why can we hear them?" That thought was Fiolon's.
    "I can hear them because you can," came Mikayla's reply. "As to why you can hear
    them-Fio, has Var ever had an Archimage?"
    "Not that I ever heard of." Fiolon's head was spinning and the river and the sea
    still seemed to wash through him at regular intervals, but his mind was becoming
    a bit clearer. "Granted, I haven't been in Var since I was a small child, and I
    don't know its history as well as I do yours, but I've never heard of Var's
    having an Archimage."
    "I think it has one now."
    "What?"
    "You. Fio, you're the Archimage. Think-or at least try to think. Haramis and
    Uzun have spent the past three years trying to teach me how to be an Archimage,
    and you've learned everything I have and then some. So you know how to be
    Archimage. And if Var has been sitting there, waiting, until someone with the
    right knowledge and skills came along…"
    "Waiting to reach out and grab the first suitable candidate…" Fiolon could feel
    the land in every part of his body. "It certainly grabbed me," he thought, "but
    how do I control it? I've been lying here for who knows how long, and I can
    sense the land, but I can't move my body, or even feel it properly."
    "Try music." Mikayla's thought swept through him, faintly amused. "That's always
    been your favorite way of bringing order out of chaos."
    "Music." Fiolon breathed in deeply and exhaled slowly, struggling for control.
    The winds became a chorus of ripple-flutes of varying sizes and pitches. But now
    they were together and the sounds they made harmonized. The waves hitting the
    shore became the dominant beat, and the flow of the river the weak beat, as the
    pulse of the land settled into a smooth rhythm. Fiolon could feel his heart
    pumping in time to it, and the blood flowed easily through his veins as the
    river ran to the sea. The sounds of the Glismak and the Wyvilo faded into
    counterpoint in the background, to be examined more carefully later. Fiolon
    opened his eyes and slowly and carefully sat up. His body was stiff and sore, so
    presumably he had been lying there for quite some time, but the lammergeier
    still stood over him, keeping watch.
    "White Lord?" The bird's thoughts came to him as clearly as Mikayla's ever had.
    "Do you wish to continue your journey?"
    Fiolon blinked up at the bird. "Can you take me to Mutavari?"
    "Of course, White Lord."
    The bird stretched out a wing and assisted Fiolon to climb onto its back, and
    they flew onward, south to the sea, and to the court of Var.
    Mikayla opened her eyes and tried to sit up. When that failed, she rolled over,
    falling off the edge of the bed and landing on her hands and knees on the floor.
    I wonder if that's what Haramis meant when she spoke of "land sense." I'll have
    to ask her.
    Mikayla dragged herself to her feet and hobbled around her room, holding on to
    the furniture, until her legs were willing to support her again. How long have I
    been lying here? she wondered. Maybe I should get something to eat; I'm
    dreadfully hungry.
    But her curiosity about what had happened to Fiolon was stronger than her
    hunger. She checked her appearance in the mirror, thinking that there was no
    point in annoying Haramis before she even opened her mouth. There was nothing
    she could do about the pale, tired, circles-under-the-eyes look on her face, but
    she brushed her hair and straightened her tunic before heading for Haramis's
    room.
    Haramis's door was open about halfway, but Haramis was sleeping, with Lady Bevis
    dozing in a chair at her bedside. Mikayla looked for Uzun, but the spot at the
    head of Haramis's bed where she had last seen him was empty. Oh, no! she thought
    in dismay. Fiolon told her it was too hot for him there!
    Mikayla turned and ran for the sitting room. Uzun was back in his place in the
    corner by the fireplace, but the fire had been allowed to die down to a very low
    level. "Uzun!" she gasped, dropping to the hearth and trying to blow more life
    into the flames. "Talk to me!" she pleaded. "What happened to you?"
    "Fiolon was right." Mikayla felt tears fill her eyes. The harp's strings were
    badly out of tune and his voice was creaky. Mikayla lit the lamps in the room
    with a word of command, although the effort made her sag limply onto the hearth.
    But even lying there she could see the damage to the harp's finish and, more
    ominously, several cracks in the wood of his frame. "It was too hot in the
    Lady's room," Uzun continued, "and the hallways were too cold, and now the
    temperature in here isn't right…" His voice trailed off.
    Pure fury gave Mikayla the strength to rise to her feet and pull repeatedly at
    the bellpull to summon Enya.
    It seemed forever before the housekeeper appeared, clad in her nightclothes and
    yawning. "So you're done sulking, are you?" She regarded Mikayla with disfavor.
    "The Lady said you could eat whenever you chose to leave your room, but do you
    have any idea what time it is?"
    "I don't care what time it is!" Mikayla snapped furiously, gesturing at the
    harp. "Just look at that fire! Are you deliberately trying to destroy Master
    Uzun? Surely after all these years, you know the level the fire is supposed to
    be kept at."
    "By the Flower!" Enya looked in dismay from the fire to the harp, then closed
    her eyes briefly to bespeak the other servants. "There will be more wood here in
    a few minutes, Princess," she said quickly. "I am terribly sorry; we let the
    fire go out when Haramis had Master Uzun moved upstairs, since no one was using
    this room, and she had him moved back only this evening, and we…" Her voice
    trailed off.
    You forgot, Mikayla finished the sentence in her head. There was no point in
    berating the housekeeper further, however; the point had obviously been made.
    But Mikayla resolved to check on Uzun's condition at frequent intervals just the
    same. "Master Uzun is back here now, and I shall be continuing to use this
    room," she said quietly, "so I would appreciate it if the temperature could be
    maintained at its customary level."
    "Yes, Princess," Enya said quickly. "I'll make sure of it. And I'll go bring up
    a tray for you. You must be hungry; you haven't eaten in days."
    "Thank you, Enya." Mikayla made herself smile at the housekeeper, despite her
    lingering annoyance at the way Uzun had been mistreated. "That's very kind of
    you. I'm afraid that I was working and lost track of the time."
    As soon as Enya was out of earshot, Uzun asked, "Working? Locked in your room
    for over two days? Just what were you doing?"
    "Over two days?" Mikayla asked. "No wonder I'm so hungry. I hope they'll feed
    Fiolon when he gets to Mutavari."
    "You were linked with Fiolon again." It wasn't a question, so it didn't matter
    that Uzun couldn't see Mikayla nod her head. "What happened to him?"
    "It was really strange, Uzun," Mikayla began, then stopped speaking as one of
    the Vispi men came in with an armload of wood and began to fix the fire. He was
    still working on the fire when Enya arrived with a tray containing a large bowl
    of adop soup and half a loaf of bread. She admonished Mikayla to eat slowly so
    that she wouldn't make herself ill. Mikayla began to nibble on the end of the
    loaf, waiting for the servants to leave so that she could talk freely to Uzun.
    When they were alone again, she told him what had happened. "Do you think that
    Fiolon really is Archimage of Var?" she finished.
    "It certainly sounds like it," the harp replied. "But I wouldn't tell Lady
    Haramis about it."
    "I wasn't planning to," Mikayla assured him, "but I don't think she'll get
    suspicious if I ask her what it was like when she became Archimage, do you?"
    "Not suspicious of Fiolon, at any rate," Uzun said dryly. He sighed in
    satisfaction. "I do feel better now that the fire has been built up, Princess.
    Thank you for that."
    "They should have done it without my having to order it," Mikayla said, pressing
    her lips together in annoyance. "If they actually managed to forget that you are
    a sentient being who needs regular care, I'll make certain that that doesn't
    happen again! I'll stop in and see you as much as I can, Uzun."
    "If you're not knocked out for days at a time again," the harp pointed out.
    "I shouldn't be," Mikayla said cheerfully. "An experience that intense has to be
    a once-in-a-lifetime occurrence."
    She went to talk to Haramis the next morning. Encouraging her to reminisce about
    her youth wasn't at all difficult, and the descriptions made Mikayla even more
    certain that her theory of what had happened to Fiolon was correct.
    But when she ventured a very general question about what it felt like to have
    land sense, Haramis glared at her. "Have you developed land sense for Ruwenda?"
    she asked sharply.
    "No, Lady!" Mikayla gasped in horror, shaking her head vigorously. By the
    Flower, she realized with sudden dismay, she's lost the land sense! But I
    certainly don't have it, and Fiolon doesn't- not for Ruwenda. So who does? Does
    anyone? She cast her mind outward, trying to sense the land. Faint images came
    back; the land was still ill, and there was still nothing Mikayla could do about
    it. "I only wondered, that's all. You said something about it once."
    Haramis looked at her in disdain. "It is not something which need concern you
    yet. Go to the library and continue your studies there."
    "Yes, Lady." Mikayla curtsied and left the room. She had read every book in
    Haramis's library long since, but she knew that the servants would tell Haramis
    if she disobeyed, so she went to the library and spent the rest of the afternoon
    holding an open book and thinking. Her thoughts were not happy ones.
    Chapter Twenty
    By the Lords of the Air, Uzun, stop telling me not to upset Lady Haramis!"
    Mikayla glared at the harp. She had come to him for sympathy after another of
    her arguments with Haramis, but Uzun wasn't cooperating. Haramis had allegedly
    resumed training Mikayla, but this training largely consisted of having Mikayla
    sit at her bedside for long hours while Haramis told her the same things over
    and over and over again. Mikayla spent a lot of time fighting a losing battle
    not to scream with frustration.
    "I don't understand why you're not upset with her," she snarled at Uzun. "Just
    look at what she did to you! First she turns you into a harp; then, when we get
    a new body for you-and you don't know what I had to promise to get that!-she
    forbids us to transfer you; and to top it all off, she has you dragged up to her
    room where she's keeping it hot enough to cause permanent damage to the
    harp-after Fiolon warned her that it would! In your place I'd be furious with
    her!"
    Uzun sighed. "I don't have to be angry with her, Mikayla; you're angry enough
    for both of us. Try to remember that she's been ill. She didn't intend to harm
    me, and she doesn't intend to hurt you."
    "That would be a much more convincing argument if she had showed any more
    consideration for us before she became ill than she does now," Mikayla pointed
    out.
    "Just please don't yell at her." Uzun sighed again. "It hurts her feelings, and
    that's bad for her recovery."
    "Why should I care about her feelings?" Mikayla demanded furiously. "She doesn't
    care about mine!" Haramis had recovered from her illness just enough to be
    thoroughly unpleasant to be around, and Mikayla was finding the strain
    intolerable.
    "Nobody cares about my feelings; I'm just a pawn. I'm not a person; I'm just a
    thing: Archimage-in-Training. Choose semi-suitable child-it doesn't matter if
    she's a round peg, cut off the round parts and shove her in a square hole! Never
    mind what she wants, never mind how much you're hurting her, never mind the
    damage you're doing, never mind what she would have been if you hadn't
    interfered. Haramis doesn't care. Nobody cares! All anybody ever cares about is
    Haramis and what she wants!" Mikayla paused to blow her nose.
    "And whatever happens to Haramis, everybody blames me! If she gets a headache,
    it's my fault. If she gets dizzy, or forgets to eat lunch, it's my fault. If she
    fell down the stairs and I was at the other end of the Tower, somebody would
    blame it on me! I'm not a sorceress; I'm a scapegoat.
    "She says that she's training me, she says that she's trying to teach me to be
    the very best Archimage I can be-but, believe me, the day she realizes that I'm
    better than she is at anything, she'll go through the roof of the Tower! She
    doesn't want another Archimage; she wants a slave, to learn only what she wants
    me to learn and only up to the point she wants me to learn it.
    "The one thing I can't ever, ever do is surpass her. I think if I did, she
    really would kill me. It's a good thing that she conveniently managed to forget
    that I can talk to the lammergeiers as soon as Fiolon left!"
    "You should be ashamed of yourself, talking about the Lady Haramis like that,"
    Uzun said sternly.
    "Why should I be ashamed of myself? I never asked to come here. I'm doing my
    best, but I never seem to do anything right, and everybody hates me, and
    everybody blames everything that goes wrong on me. I wish I were dead!" She
    burst into tears, but continued to speak through her sobs. "And anytime I get
    unhappy, everybody just says 'Oh, don't upset Lady Haramis.' Well, if Lady
    Haramis doesn't want to be upset, maybe she should have chosen somebody else for
    her successor!
    "I know she's part of my family, sort of, and I'm supposed to love her; I know
    she's my mistress and I ought to serve her faithfully"-by now Mikayla was
    sobbing so hard that her words were coming out in short semi-intelligible
    bursts-"… but I don't even like her… and I don't like myself… and I don't like
    my life. I hate it here; I'd rather live with a band of Skritek."
    She scrambled to her feet and headed for the door. "I'm going out for a walk."
    "Isn't that dangerous?" Uzun protested. "Where are you going, and when will you
    be back? It's not that long until dark."
    "I'm going wherever I want to go, and I'll be back when I'm damn good and
    ready-probably when the three moons rise together in the west!"
    And it might be that long after all, Mikayla thought uncomfortably several hours
    later. She was cold and completely lost in the dark. I could die out here.
    Storming out of the Tower with no supplies, no lantern, and clothes that really
    aren't warm enough to wear outside after dark was not the most intelligent
    decision I ever made. I ought to control my temper better, I guess. If I live
    though this, I suppose I'll really have to make more of an effort…
    She trudged steadily onward, not knowing where she was going, but knowing that
    if she stopped, she would freeze to death all too quickly. And now that dying is
    a real possibility, she thought wryly, I'm not so sure that I want to die after
    all. But I'm still not sure that I want to go back to the Tower and be Haramis's
    good little girl. I wish I had somewhere else to go. For that matter, I wish I
    could see where I'm going-I would have to pull a stupid stunt like this on an
    overcast night.
    It was then that her inability to see where she was putting her feet finally
    caught up with her. Whatever she stepped on-she was never sure; it happened so
    fast-slid under her feet, or maybe she slid, but she was slipping, falling past
    the edge of something, dropping terrifyingly fast. Then she hit the ground, or
    more accurately, the water. Running water.
    Funny, I didn't think there was any unfrozen water anywhere near here. I wonder
    where I am. Not that it makes much difference now; I'll be unconscious in
    minutes and dead soon after. Still she thrashed about, trying to keep her head
    out of the water enough to keep breathing. Suddenly something lifted her bodily
    out of the water by the back of her tunic (her cloak had been lost when she
    fell) and flew through the air with her.
    It was excruciatingly painful. Mikayla was soaked to the skin, and whatever was
    holding her was flying quickly. Icy-cold air stung her face and body, the wind
    slapped her wet hair into her face like a whip, and when a thick strand of her
    hair blew into her mouth, she discovered that the water on it had frozen solid.
    Claws poked through her tunic and scratched her back. She still couldn't see
    anything in the dark night and was too miserable to care whether whatever
    carried her could see, or to wonder whether it was trying to rescue her or
    simply wanted her for a snack.
    They flew upward and it got even colder. It seemed that they flew forever, and
    then apparently they passed over a ridge and began to descend again. The air
    seemed much warmer suddenly, and Mikayla remembered that the Vispi lived in
    valleys warmed by hot springs and consorted with the lammergeiers. But
    lammergeiers were diurnal; a lammergeier shouldn't even be awake at this hour,
    much less be able to see anything.
    Whatever it was, however, apparently it could see. Mikayla felt the change in
    air pressure and flow as the wings above her swept back and inward as they
    entered some sort of tunnel or narrow cave.
    The claws released her, and she fell, again into water. But this water was
    boiling hot. It not only wants a snack, it wants it cooked! she thought,
    screaming in pain. She clutched at the stone side of the pool she was in, trying
    to drag herself out, but her muscles weren't responding. All she could do was
    keep her head above the water and breathe in painful gasps. Tears ran down her
    face; she didn't think anything in her life had ever hurt so much.
    It seemed forever before she noticed that the water wasn't really boiling; it
    was just warm enough to be thawing her out, which was obviously necessary,
    however much it hurt. The pain began to lessen, she started to relax, and then
    she heard the voice in her head.
    "… and they call me a birdbrain!" it was saying. "What were you doing out alone
    at night, anyway?"
    "Running away," Mikayla said crossly. "And now I suppose you'll drag me straight
    back." There was a dim light coming from a tunnel off to the left of the pool
    and she could see the pale shape of her rescuer. "You are a lammergeier, aren't
    you?"
    "Of a sort," it replied, leaning in for a closer look at her. She saw then that
    what she had taken for color caused by reflected light off the snow outside
    wasn't; the bird really was white. Completely white. And his eyes… "Call me
    Red-Eye," it said with a sigh. "Everyone else does."
    "It is unusual coloring," Mikayla said as politely as she could. "And you may
    call me Mika." Never give out your true name to strangers-and this is definitely
    strange.
    "I may or may not return you to whatever you were running from," the bird
    continued. "Since I ran away from my creators, I have a certain sympathy for
    runaways."
    "Creators?" Mikayla asked. "You mean you weren't simply born like this?"
    "Have you ever seen a creature born without its normal coloring?"
    "I've read about it," Mikayla said. "It happens naturally sometimes in both
    animals and people. It's called albino."
    "Well, in my case, it was not natural," Red-Eye snapped. "They made me this way,
    and they tried to control me, to make me do their bidding, to spy for them, to
    fetch and carry things at night-that's why I look like this; they wanted a
    lamrnergeier that could function at night."
    "Who are 'they'?" Mikayla asked, fascinated. Changing a living creature out of
    its natural form before it was even born was a level of magic she had not
    previously encountered.
    "The Priests of the Time of Darkness," Red-Eye replied. "They live on one of the
    other mountain peaks."
    "Which one? And where are we now? I got rather lost when I ran off, after it got
    dark."
    The bird had been holding its head cocked to one side, listening carefully to
    her speech. "You're from Ruwenda, aren't you?"
    "Yes," Mikayla replied. "How can you tell?"
    "By the way you speak," it replied. "I found you on the peak you call Mount
    Brom, and we are now on the one you call Mount Rotolo. As for where the Priests
    of the Time of Darkness live, if you are fortunate, you will never find out."
    His tone was grim enough to keep Mikayla from voicing her suspicion that they
    lived on Mount Gidris-after all, it was the only one of the three main peaks the
    bird hadn't named. Something about Mount Gidris had frightened Enya, too.
    Mikayla dragged herself reluctantly out of the pool. By now the water
    temperature felt comfortable, but the skin on her hands was shriveling up in a
    definite sign that she'd been in the water too long.
    "There's a pile of furs back there," Red-Eye said, flicking a wing tip toward
    the light down the tunnel. "Hang up your clothes to dry, then curl up in the
    furs and get some sleep. I'm going out to hunt. I'll be back around dawn, but
    please remember that I sleep during the daytime. Tomorrow night we'll discuss
    what's to be done with you."
    Mikayla had no fault to find with that plan; she was as tired as she had ever
    been in her life. "Thank you," she said, "and good hunting."
    Life with Red-Eye quickly settled into a comfortable pattern. Mikayla sensed
    that the bird was lonely, and it seemed glad to have her company. For the first
    few days she was content to rest in the cave and to eat whatever it caught on
    its hunting trips, though she suspected that it was flying great distances to
    bring back such delicacies as togar, a bird that she knew perfectly well lived
    in the swamps. Various types of vart seemed to be a staple of its diet, and the
    small rodents were perfectly acceptable food to Mikayla, who had never been a
    fussy eater.
    Red-Eye, after declaring that her clothes were hopeless as protection from the
    cold, taught her how to control her body temperature by magic. It knew quite a
    bit of magic that Mikayla hadn't encountered before. She wondered where it had
    learned, but she remembered the bitterriess with which it had spoken of its
    creators and refrained from asking.
    Once she had learned to control her body temperature, Red-Eye started taking her
    out at night with it. She learned how to sense the way the wind curled through
    the mountains and wrapped itself around the peaks and to tell how thick a cloud
    layer was from either the top or the bottom without having to fly through it.
    Her night vision, which had always been good for a human, improved still
    further. Of course, she thought, the fact that I don't see daylight these days
    probably helps. Like Red-Eye, she had become nocturnal; now she slept all day.
    One evening she was wakened by the jingling of the sphere against her chest. She
    sat up yawning, and pulled it out to dangle in front of her face. She could see
    Fiolon quite clearly in it; the sphere seemed to glow with its own light, but
    she knew that it was only the lamps in the room with Fiolon that provided the
    illumination. "What's the matter, Fio?" she asked sleepily.
    "What's the matter?" Fiolon repeated in irritation. "You storm out of the Tower
    at twilight and don't return, leaving Guards-woman Nella and two search parties
    of Vispi to spend a week looking for your body, you don't even contact me, and
    when I bespeak you, you yawn and ask what's wrong!"
    "Sorry, Fio," Mikayla apologized sleepily. "I'm just waking up. And I forgot
    that you couldn't just ask the mirror to find me anymore."
    "Oh, Uzun tried that first," Fiolon snapped.
    "He did?" Mikayla asked. "How? Did Haramis relent about his new body?"
    "No, Haramis is still about the same."
    "She's not worried about me, then?" Mikayla grinned. "I didn't think she would
    be."
    Fiolon sighed. "Let's not discuss Haramis, all right?"
    "By all means," Mikayla agreed. "I'm sorry if Uzun is worried; I never meant to
    worry him-I just couldn't stand it there! Is he all right? He was damaged by
    being dragged about, just the way you said he would be."
    "I can understand your desire to leave," Fiolon said. "But he was dreadfully
    worried about you; he was afraid you were dead. As for his condition, the damage
    is pretty much stabilized. And I'm sending a harp builder back with Guardswoman
    Nella to see how much can be fixed."
    "Nella's with you?" Mikayla asked. "Where are you?"
    "I'm in Let."
    "Let?" Mikayla was surprised. "The last thing I knew, you were going to
    Mutavari."
    "I did," Fiolon replied. "And when my uncle the King found out that I could deal
    with the Wyvilo, he sent me to Let to trade with them. The lumber I'm getting is
    helping his shipbuilding no end, so he's thrilled with me. He's talking about
    giving me a dukedom."
    "Sounds a lot better than being locked in a Tower in the middle of nowhere,"
    Mikayla commented.
    "Parts of the job are rather tricky," Fiolon pointed out. "I couldn't do it
    properly without the land sense. Trees have to be cut very selectively; you
    can't just chop down everything in one area, or you'll get erosion, which
    damages both the land and the water. I'm rather enjoying it, actually," he
    admitted. "I'm admitting to some magical ability, but not telling anyone how
    much I really have. I don't want to announce that I'm an Archimage and be
    regarded with superstitious awe. The senses and skills I have are to be used for
    the good of the land and its folk, but apparently I don't have to cut myself off
    from all human contact to use them."
    Then why does Haramis do it-and expect me to follow her example? Mikayla
    wondered. If being the Archimage just means having land sense and using it for
    the good of the land and its folk, that's not so bad…
    "Anyway"-Fiolon was still speaking-"Uzun swore Nella to secrecy and told her how
    to use the mirror. She asked it to locate you, but all it showed was
    blackness-which, incidentally, is all I'm seeing in this sphere. I can hear you
    just fine, but I can't see you."
    "It's dark in here, Fiolon," Mikayla said calmly. "You couldn't see me if you
    were sitting right here."
    "That might have been the problem, then," Fiolon said absent-mindedly, "because
    when he told her to have it locate me, it worked just fine. So he sent her to
    find me, to ask me to find you."
    "Poor Uzun." Mikayla sighed. "If he had his new body, he could probably scry for
    himself, and he could certainly use the mirror."
    "Would his new body be able to stand the cold down there?" Fiolon asked. "A
    Nyssomu can't."
    "We stored his body down there, Fio, remember?" Mikayla reminded him. "And I
    specified tolerance for extreme cold when I told them what I needed for the
    body."
    "I didn't know that," Fiolon said thoughtfully. "I thought we could store it
    down there only because of the way it was packed."
    "No." Mikayla shook her head. "It should be fine down there even unpacked. In
    the meantime I hope your harp builder is good at repairs-you haven't seen the
    damage, have you?"
    "Nella gave me a good description."
    "Did she tell you that the finish is crazed over most of the wood and the frame
    has cracks in three places?"
    "She said two places, and she said the finish looked funny."
    "Well, I suppose that's a reasonable description, especially from a guard. To
    her, 'crazed' probably means someone not right in the head, not small cracks all
    over wood finish. Anyway, please give her my apologies, and my thanks for her
    efforts on my behalf -or Uzun's behalf."
    "You still haven't said where you are, Mika."
    "In a cave, someplace on Mount Rotolo."
    "That doesn't narrow it down much," Fiolon protested.
    "Just tell Uzun that I'm safe and well," Mikayla said. "Believe me, Fiolon,
    Haramis doesn't really want me there. The woman hates me; I swear it. She didn't
    like me much to begin with, and now she's old and sick and unable to use her
    magic, and I'm young and healthy and able to use it-although she keeps
    forgetting that. She doesn't even remember that I can bespeak the lammergeiers.
    Her idea of 'training' me is to make me sit by her bed and listen to stories as
    if I were a small child."
    "That doesn't sound all that bad," Fiolon said. "Useless, perhaps, but not
    intolerable."
    "She tells the same stories every single day, Fio. Day after day after day after
    day after-
    "I'll grant intolerable."
    "I knew you'd understand." Mikayla sighed. "I was turning into a monster there;
    I just had to get away. It wasn't just her I hated; I hated myself as well. Now
    I'm someplace where I don't hate myself, and I'm going to stay here for a
    while-maybe even until I have to go back to the Temple."
    "The Temple?"
    "You remember the Temple, Fio. I have to stay a virgin, and I have to go there
    every spring for the next seven years. That was the price for Uzun's body."
    "But Uzun doesn't have his body," Fiolon protested.
    "That's not their fault," Mikayla pointed out. "They kept their word, and I
    shall keep mine. What Haramis does," she added bitterly, "is quite beyond our
    control."
    "True," Fiolon agreed. "I'll send Nella and the harp builder back by lammergeier
    tomorrow, with a message to Uzun that you are well. What he tells Haramis is his
    decision."
    "Thank you, Fio. Give Uzun my love, and tell him I'm sorry that my behavior gave
    him cause for worry."
    "I shall. Take care of yourself, Mika, and bespeak me from time to time."
    "I will. Don't worry about me."
    Fiolon muttered something she didn't quite catch as the sphere went dark.
    "What was that?" Red-Eye's thoughts whispered in her head.
    "My cousin," Mikayla explained. "He was worried about me. He's right, I should
    have contacted him."
    "You communicate with that little ball?" The bird cocked its head to one side,
    looking at the sphere Mikayla still held in front of her.
    "Yes," Mikayla replied, tucking it back into her tunic. "We found them-he has
    one just like it-in some ruins on the Golobar River a few years ago. I suspect
    that we could bespeak each other without them, but they're a convenient focus."
    "He can bespeak the lammergeiers?" Red-Eye asked. "I did hear him say that,
    didn't I? How does he do that?"
    Mikayla shrugged. "He just does. It's not all that hard; I can hear you, and
    I'll bet most of the Vispi can, too, if you call to them. In his case, I think
    the fact that he's Archimage of Var probably has something to do with it."
    "So Var has an Archimage," Red-Eye said. "That's interesting. It's too bad that
    Labornok doesn't."
    "Doesn't it?" Mikayla asked. "I thought the Archimage of Ruwenda was also
    Archimage of Labornok. After all, the two Kingdoms have been joined since she
    became Archimage."
    The bird's eyes narrowed in what passed for a frown and it lowered its head
    until its eyes were level with hers. Mikayla had been around it long enough to
    realize that this was a sign of avian displeasure.
    "The Archimage has never paid any heed to her responsibility for Labornok," it
    said, "and lately she has been ignoring Ruwenda as well. This is bad, for both
    lands and for their folk."
    "She's been ill," Mikayla said. "It's not completely her fault- Ruwenda, that
    is. As for Labornok, she's probably never forgiven them for killing her
    parents."
    "The welfare of the land is more important than the personal feelings of the
    Archimage," Red-Eye said sternly.
    Mikayla decided this was not a good time to tell him she was supposed to be the
    next Archimage. Besides, she thought, Haramis may be wrong about me. If I didn't
    get the land sense when she lost it, perhaps someone else has it. The land may
    have chosen a new Archimage already.
    Chapter Twenty-One
    Time with Red-Eye slipped past in a calm even series of nights, punctuated by
    occasional talks with Fiolon. Shortly after midwinter, when there was too much
    rain for the logging to continue, Fiolon went back to the King's court at
    Mutavari. Mikayla even stayed awake long enough one morning to see something of
    the city through Fiolon's eyes as he walked through it, showing it to her.
    One evening in the spring she awoke before Red-Eye, who had flown farther than
    usual the night before. The nights were getting shorter now, and there was still
    some daylight outside of the cave, but when Mikayla pulled out her sphere and
    idly began to scry Mutavari, she saw that it was already dark there. Of course,
    she thought, it's farther east than here; it gets dark sooner there.
    She focused on the palace, preparing to bespeak Fiolon. He was in his room, so
    she looked to be sure he was alone. Since she was scrying with her sphere,
    instead of using it to link directly with him, she could see him and his
    surroundings. He wasn't alone. There was a woman in his bed, a young woman only
    a few years older than Mikayla, and much prettier. She had a figure, which
    Mikayla didn't yet, and long dark hair and sapphire-blue eyes. Mikayla hated her
    on sight. The fact that her dress was carelessly tossed on the clothing chest at
    the foot of the bed did not make Mikayla feel any better about the situation.
    Very cautiously, Mikayla linked with Fiolon, so softly that he was not at first
    aware of her. Of course, most of his attention was on the woman in his bed. But
    apparently he had just walked in and found her there; he was still fully
    dressed, and Mikayla sensed that he was almost as surprised as she was. "What
    are you doing here?" he was asking the woman.
    "I came to congratulate you, my Lord Duke," the woman replied in seductive
    tones.
    "You could have done that perfectly well in the Great Hall when the King made
    the announcement," Fiolon pointed out, striving for calm. Mikayla could feel his
    emotions, but she wasn't accustomed to these: a mixture of nervousness and
    excitement. Fiolon had always been the calm one.
    "In the Great Hall?" The woman, whoever she was, laughed. "Your elevation in
    rank should be celebrated, and we certainly couldn't celebrate it properly
    there." She flowed out of bed and across the room-like a swamp worm, Mikayla
    thought viciously -twined her arms about Fiolon's neck, and kissed him full on
    the lips. Mikayla felt a jolt run through her and realized that her link to
    Fiolon was leaving her wide-open to everything he felt. And he was feeling very
    strange. It didn't feel at all the way Mikayla had felt when Timon had tried to
    kiss her; this felt sort of warm, and dizzying, like some sort of magic, as
    energy flowed between their bodies. It reminded Mikayla of the way the chant had
    taken hold of her, that first day at the Temple of Meret. Fiolon's thoughts were
    shutting down, just the way hers had; his shields were completely down, and the
    woman was pulling energy from him like a Skritek drowning its prey.
    "Fiolon!" Mikayla bespoke him urgently. "Wake up! Fight it!"
    "Mika?" Fiolon lifted his head and looked around the room in a dazed fashion.
    "Think, Fiolon! What are you doing?"
    "Mika?" the woman said inquiringly, wriggling against Fiolon and trying to pull
    him closer to her-which Mikayla would have sworn was physically impossible.
    Fiolon felt fever hot through their link, and Mikayla felt very strange herself.
    When Fiolon pushed the woman forcibly away from him, a part of Mikayla ached
    along with him.
    "My betrothed," Fiolon snapped, grabbing a cloak from a peg near the door. "I'm
    leaving, and I suggest you dress and do likewise. If I find you in here again,
    you will regret it." His tone was grim enough to make the woman look frightened.
    "I didn't realize you were betrothed," she said nervously. "Why do you never
    speak of her?"
    "Doubtless because idle gossip has never been one of my preferred pastimes,"
    Fiolon said crushingly, turning on his heel and stalking from the room.
    He went outside and made his way to a deserted stretch of beach. The fishermen
    whose boats were dragged up on the sand had doubtless all gone home for supper,
    Mikayla thought.
    Fiolon pulled out his sphere. His face looked drawn and troubled. "Mika?" he
    asked. "Are you all right?"
    "I think so," Mikayla replied shakily. "What was that? Who was she?"
    "Nobody important," Fiolon replied. "Just one of the court ladies with even less
    sense than morals."
    "It felt as though she was trying to use magic on you," Mikayla said uneasily.
    Fiolon shook his head. "No. That wasn't magic. Just sex. For most of the women
    at court, it's their only asset."
    "Is that why you said we were betrothed? So that she'd leave you alone?"
    Fiolon sighed. "It might help-she'll gossip about it, of course; they all do.
    Not that my being betrothed would stop some of them. There are several of them
    that my being married wouldn't stop."
    "But what if they find out we're not really betrothed?"
    "I'll talk to the King and make sure he doesn't deny it," Fiolon said. "There
    isn't enough travel between here and the Citadel for anyone to ask your parents
    about it, and they don't know what you're doing these days anyway."
    "But they know that I'm supposed to be Archimage…" Suddenly Mikayla realized
    something. "You're an Archimage, and nobody seems to expect you to be celibate.
    Does this mean I don't have to be?" She felt hopeful for a moment; maybe she and
    Fiolon could marry after all… "Oh, that's right; they don't know you're an
    Archimage, do they?"
    "No," Fiolon said, "but I don't think it makes much difference.
    They do think I'm a powerful magician. And I've watched other magicians at
    court-several of them don't seem to feel the slightest need to be celibate." He
    frowned. "I'll have to do some research on this," he said.
    "While you're doing that," Mikayla said, "see if you can find out why I haven't
    become physically mature yet. My sisters all were by the time they were my age.
    I'd forgotten that I should be, but what just happened did bring it back to
    mind."
    "I'll see what I can find out," Fiolon promised her. "I seem to be aging more
    slowly than normal, too, so it may be because we use magic."
    "If you're not fully mature either," Mikayla asked, "why was she trying to
    compromise you?"
    "Oh, that's simple," Fiolon explained. "My uncle the King just made me Duke of
    Let. He announced it at court today."
    "I see." Mikayla understood perfectly. She may not have paid concentrated
    attention to court politics as a child, but she would have had to be blind and
    deaf not to have figured out the way things worked in a court by the time she
    was nine or ten, let alone twelve. Fiolon was now a prime catch; he would be a
    target for every ambitious maiden in the Kingdom. No wonder he wanted to pretend
    to be betrothed!
    Well, that was fine with her. If it weren't for her promise to the Temple of
    Meret-and the fact that Haramis would undoubtedly have a fit and do something
    dreadful to them, Mikayla would have been willing to fly to Var and marry Fiolon
    that very night.
    She could hear feathers rustling nearby; Red-Eye was waking up. "I have to go
    now, Fiolon," she said. "It's time to go hunting. Will you be all right now?"
    Fiolon grimaced. "I have to go back to the palace and change for the formal
    banquet to celebrate my new rank. I just hope I can keep my room clear of
    unwanted company."
    "How about an illusion?" Mikayla suggested. "Giant lingats spinning sticky webs
    all over the bed-or night carolers swooping through to snag their wings in the
    hair of anyone who troubles you?"
    "Definitely an idea," Fiolon said, beginning to smile thoughtfully.
    "Oh, my Lord Duke," Mikayla added in teasing tones, "don't take this the wrong
    way, but-congratulations!"
    Fiolon threw back his head and laughed aloud, startling several seabirds. "Thank
    you, Princess," he said with a courtly bow. "Good hunting."
    "Good luck avoiding the hunters," Mikayla replied. "Be well, Fio."
    "Be well, Mika."
    Mikayla continued to fly with Red-Eye, and Fiolon returned to Let as soon as he
    possibly could. But the incident had reminded Mikayla of her promise to return
    to the Temple of Meret at the appointed time. So she watched the moons and
    waited for the time to come.
    "Red-Eye," she said as they were preparing to fly out one beautiful spring
    night, "I've enjoyed being with you more than I can tell you, but tomorrow I
    have to be someplace else. Can you take me to Mount Gidris at dawn?"
    "Mount Gidris?"
    Funny, she thought, it sounds upset, almost frightened. Oh yes, its creators
    live there, don't they?
    "You don't have to stay there long," she said reassuringly. "Just swoop in
    before dawn and drop me off near the Temple of Meret. It's on the northern side-
    "I know where it is," the bird said grimly. "What business have you there?"
    "A promise to fulfill," she replied.
    "Tell me," it said. "What is your promise?"
    "To remain a virgin, and to spend a month there each spring for seven years, as
    one of the Daughters of the Goddess Meret."
    Red-Eye dropped its head and looked fiercely at her. "And what do you get in
    return for this?"
    "They made a body for a friend of mine, whose spirit is trapped in a harp. They
    have kept their promise, and I must keep mine."
    "Does your cousin know about this?" Red-Eye asked. It had made a point of being
    awake and listening whenever she spoke to Fiolon. The idea of a male Archimage
    seemed to fascinate it. "Does he approve?"
    "He doesn't own me," Mikayla pointed out. "And yes, he knows."
    The bird made a sound of disgust. "And does he know anything about this Temple?"
    "Not much," Mikayla said. "When I was first being trained, I talked to him every
    night while the other Daughters were at the ritual for the Second Hour of
    Darkness. But once I learned enough to join them in all the rituals, I didn't
    have much chance to bespeak him anymore."
    "Because you speak to him aloud," Red-Eye said.
    "It's certainly easier that way. And there isn't much privacy in the Temple,"
    Mikayla admitted. "I had to be careful to keep them from finding the sphere."
    Red-Eye looked at her. "If you go in there dressed as you are now, they'll spot
    it at once."
    Mikayla looked down at herself in dismay. Ever since she had learned to control
    her body temperature, she had paid little attention to her clothing. She had
    made a point of washing her tunic at intervals, but now it was badly faded, and
    either it had shrunk or she had grown again. And the neckline was nowhere near
    high enough to cover the sphere's ribbon, which was still, after everything it
    had been through, the same bright green it had been the day she had found it.
    "You're right," she said. She looked up into the reddish eyes looking down at
    her. "Could you keep it for me, please?" she asked it. "Just for a month."
    Red-Eye dropped its head again.
    It's really upset, Mikayla thought. Why?
    "I shall keep your sphere safe," it said, "and I shall take you to the Temple
    before dawn and fetch you from there again a month hence. But I want a promise
    from you in return."
    "What?" Mikayla asked. "What can I do for you that you can't do for yourself?"
    "Every night, when you go to your bed after the ritual of the Second Hour of
    Darkness, you are to bespeak me. No matter what happens; no matter how tired you
    are. Every single night. You can do this silently; no one there will know what
    you are doing. Do I have your promise?"
    "You do."
    "Every night?"
    "Every night."
    "Good. And if your cousin who can hear the lammergeiers should use the sphere to
    bespeak you, I will tell him where and how you are."
    Mikayla reached out impulsively and hugged as much of the great bird as she
    could reach. "Thank you, Red-Eye. You are a prince among lammergeiers."
    "Come then." Red-Eye extended a wing. "Let us fly."
    * * *
    Shortly before dawn, Mikayla stood again on the path near the Temple on Mount
    Gidris and watched Red-Eye fly away, her sphere wrapped securely around one leg.
    "Fly well, Red-Eye," she whispered. Then she went down the path to the Temple,
    setting a glamour to keep herself unseen until she could get to her room, wash,
    and change into the proper clothing for the dawn ritual.
    The Eldest Daughter looked approvingly at her when she joined her sisters in the
    procession to the chapel, but, as usual, no one spoke until after breakfast. By
    then, Mikayla had slipped back into the rhythm of the rituals and was beginning
    to feel that she had never left.
    "You remembered your promise, Sister," the Eldest Daughter said. "The Goddess is
    pleased."
    "Thank you, Eldest Sister," Mikayla said. It's good to be back here, she
    thought. It's nice to be approved of, and human company can be pleasant on
    occasion-depending on the humans, of course.
    As she had promised, she bespoke Red-Eye every night, even though she had
    nothing to tell him. Every day was like every other day in the Temple, and after
    a few days she felt as if she had never left. The only change in the routine was
    the Spring Festival, which celebrated the annual rising of the River Noku as the
    snow began to melt.
    The Youngest Daughter of the Goddess represented the Goddess in the procession,
    and spent most of the day being carried about by the young men of the Temple on
    a richly carved high-backed wooden throne, while the other Daughters, dressed in
    green robes, walked on either side of the throne carrying fans that prevented
    most of the congregation from seeing whether there was anyone sitting there at
    all. They had all had to learn more chants for the Festival, but by now Mikayla
    found the Temple chants easy enough to learn.
    She dutifully reported this to Red-Eye, along with her opinion that this was a
    truly boring ritual. The lammergeier seemed amused.
    Then the Husband of the Goddess Meret came to the Daughters' room one afternoon.
    Mikayla was startled to see him there, but the others showed no surprise.
    Nervousness, and a certain subdued excitement, but no surprise.
    "Why is he here?" Mikayla whispered to the girl next to her.
    The girl looked at her in surprise. "It's the Choosing," she whispered back. "He
    chooses the Youngest Daughter for next year."
    "Oh." Mikayla stood silently, following the example of the other girls. She
    remembered her first night there, last fall, when she had realized that one of
    the Daughters was called "Youngest" whether she was or not. She had no idea,
    however, how this "Youngest" had been chosen. I guess I'm about to find out.
    The priest was robed in black, as usual, and wore his golden mask. The Eldest
    Daughter put her mask on as well; apparently she had brought it from its place
    in the chapel for this purpose. She went and fetched a small chest out of her
    room and set it on the small altar at one side of the room. Mikayla had noticed
    the altar, of course, when she had first arrived in the Temple, but she had
    never seen it used before.
    The Eldest Daughter removed a golden headdress from the box. Mikayla stared at
    it in awe. It was the most incredible thing she had ever seen. It seemed to be
    of pure gold, judging from the effort it took for the Eldest Daughter to lift it
    out of the box. The headdress was made in the form of a lammergeier, shaped so
    that the bird's neck would rest on the top of the wearer's forehead with its
    neck arched and the bird's head facing straight ahead. The spine of the bird
    would lie along the top of the wearer's head, with the tail feathers sticking
    out behind, and the wings, which were so perfectly crafted that each individual
    feather was incised into the gold and the pin feathers looked capable of motion,
    swept downward so that they would lie along each side of the wearer's head. It
    must be heavy, Mikayla thought, watching as the Eldest Daughter and the Husband
    of the Goddess held it between them as they stood before the altar.
    The Daughters went to sit in their places on the long bench in front of the
    fireplace, and Mikayla hastily joined them. If anyone had noticed her staring,
    they ignored it, but Mikayla felt gauche and unsure of herself for the first
    time since she had finished learning the chants.
    The priest began a new chant, one Mikayla hadn't heard before. "Give praise to
    the Peak of the South," he intoned.
    "Kiss the ground before her hemsut," the Eldest Daughter replied.
    "Praise to Meret, the Powerful One."
    "Praise to Meret, the Hidden One."
    "Praise to Meret, the Lofty One."
    "Praise to Meret, the Mother of the Land."
    "Praise to Meret, the Source of the River."
    "Praise to Meret, the Source of the Sea."
    "Praised be Meret in Her Boundlessness."
    "Praised be Meret in Her Hiddenness."
    "Praised be Meret in Her Darkness."
    "Praised be Meret in Her Choice."
    Together the Husband and the Eldest Daughter walked along the line of maidens
    sitting still and silent on the bench. They held the headdress over each girl in
    turn. Mikayla watched out of the corner of her eye, wondering what the point of
    all this was, since nothing seemed to be happening. Then they came to her, and
    as they held the headdress over her head, it seemed to slip from their grasp.
    Although it had been only a few inches above her head, it felt to Mikayla as if
    the headdress had been dropped from a great height. She braced her neck against
    its weight and clasped her hands together tightly in her lap. For an instant she
    had the curious feeling that the headdress was moving, like the bird it
    represented, adjusting itself in a more comfortable position on her head-more
    comfortable for it, at any rate. Mikayla did not think she would ever consider
    it comfortable.
    "Praised be Meret in Her Choice." The other Daughters joined with the Eldest
    Daughter and the Husband of the Goddess to repeat the chant as they helped
    Mikayla to her feet and drew her to stand in front of the altar. Mikayla stood
    there quietly, wondering what was expected of her. Apparently nothing was, for
    no one gave any indication that she was failing in anything she was supposed to
    do.
    The Daughters began to line up in the order in which they usually progressed to
    the chapel, and Mikayla realized that it was time for the ritual of the Hour
    When the Sun Embraces the Sacred Peak. Before she could move to her accustomed
    place at the end of the line, however, the Husband and the Eldest Daughter
    pulled her between them.
    When they arrived in the chapel, the Daughters sat on their bench, each girl
    sitting one place down from her usual spot, leaving two spaces at the end where
    the Eldest Daughter sat. The Eldest Daughter and the Husband of the Goddess, who
    were still holding Mikayla between them, took her onto the dais in full view of
    the congregation. Mikayla, who hadn't had that many people staring at her since
    she dropped a knife at a state dinner when she was ten, felt frozen with
    self-consciousness. Don't worry, she told herself firmly, the Husband and the
    Eldest Daughter don't want you to make mistakes, and they'll make certain that
    you don't.
    Fortunately no one seemed to expect her to speak, which was a good thing because
    Mikayla wasn't sure that she could talk with all that weight on her head. The
    Husband and the Eldest Daughter of the Goddess did all the talking-or
    chanting-as they presented Mikayla to the congregation as the Chosen One, the
    Beloved Youngest Daughter of the Goddess. Then the Eldest Daughter led Mikayla
    back behind the curtain and indicated the seat next to hers. The girl in the
    next place down, who had been the Youngest Daughter for the previous year, held
    the box for the headdress in her lap. The Eldest Daughter removed the headdress
    and replaced it in the box, which the Daughter then tucked under the bench.
    Mikayla suppressed a sigh of relief as the weight was removed from her head.
    The Eldest Daughter returned to the dais, and the ritual proceeded normally from
    that point on.
    After the ritual, when the Daughters returned to their room for supper, the
    other Daughters congratulated Mikayla on having been granted the favor of the
    Goddess. When they sat down for supper, Mikayla was placed between the Eldest
    Daughter and the previous Youngest Daughter, and she realized that this
    represented a permanent change in the ranking order-at least until next year
    when they choose someone else, she thought.
    The ritual of the Second Hour of Darkness was back to normal as well, aside from
    Mikayla's new place in line. But still, she was unusually tired when she went to
    bed-so tired that she almost fell asleep before she could bespeak Red-Eye.
    She fought sleep as she cast her thoughts toward Mount Rotolo. "Red-Eye."
    "Mika." The bird's reply was immediate, as usual. Mikayla suspected that it knew
    her schedule as well as she did. "Another quiet day, I trust."
    "Not quite," Mikayla thought back. "I've been Chosen."
    "Youngest Daughter for next year?" There was a trace of anxiety in the bird's
    thoughts.
    "Yes," Mika thought back. "And that headdress is almost as heavy as you are, and
    I am sooo tired…"
    "Mika!" The thought was sharp. "Did anyone say anything about a jubilee?"
    "No," Mika thought sleepily. "What's a jubilee?"
    "Are you sure?" Red-Eye was insistent.
    "Yes, positive. I've never heard the word in my life." That stirred a thought,
    even through her sleepiness. "There was one word in the ritual I hadn't heard
    before."
    "What was it?" the bird demanded.
    "I'm thinking." Mikayla ran backward through the day in her mind. " 'Kiss the
    ground before her hemsut'-the Eldest Daughter said it. What's a hemsut?"
    "Oh that." Red-Eye sounded relieved. "It's nothing you need to worry about, it's
    just a special word for a female spirit. She was talking about the Goddess,
    wasn't she?"
    "Yes," Mikayla thought sleepily. "It was part of a long chant of praise of the
    Goddess."
    "That's all right, then. Go to sleep, Mika."
    That was a suggestion Mikayla had no trouble in following.
    The next morning after the ritual of the First Hour, the Eldest Daughter put the
    headdress back on Mikayla and drew her along toward the back of the Temple,
    along a route in which the floor got higher and the ceiling lower with each
    room.
    "Where are we going?" Mikayla whispered softly, anxious enough to ignore the
    custom of not speaking until after breakfast.
    "You are to be presented to the Goddess," the Eldest Daughter whispered back.
    "Be silent."
    Mikayla had to close her throat against a gasp of surprise when they reached
    their final destination. The part of her that lived in the Temple realized that
    she was in the Holy of Holies, the Sanctuary where the Goddess lived, where only
    the highest of the priesthood ever went. The part of her that had explored
    Orogastus's Tower with Fiolon recognized this as the room she had seen in the
    magic mirror.
    The Husband of the Goddess was there, as was another man both robed and veiled
    in black. Mikayla was fairly certain she had never seen him before. The two men
    opened the shrine, a cabinet set against the solid rock wall, and reverently
    lifted out the wooden statue of the Goddess.
    Mikayla kept a close eye on the Eldest Daughter so that she could guess what she
    was supposed to do. Together they un-dressed the statue and laid it on the
    table. The man in the black veil anointed the statue with some sort of oil that
    smelled very strange to Mikayla-it didn't even remind her of anything she had
    ever smelled before. While he did that, the Husband of the Goddess stood at Her
    head swinging a thurible that gave off a thick cloud of incense.
    When the anointing was done, the women dressed the statue in fresh clothing from
    a clothing chest at one side of the room, while the men produced food and wine
    from another chest and placed it on a small table next to the shrine. Then the
    men lifted the statue to a standing position in front of the shrine, and the
    Eldest Daughter pushed Mikayla gently to indicate that she should kneel before
    the statue.
    Mikayla knelt and looked up at the statue's face. Even though she knew that it
    was only painted wood, she could have sworn that the eyes actually saw her,
    measured her, and judged her while the Husband and the Eldest Daughter asked the
    Goddess to bless her Chosen Youngest Daughter. Mikayla was glad when the ritual
    was over and the Eldest Daughter led her back to the chapel to replace the
    headdress in its box before they took it back to the Daughters' room and joined
    their Sisters for breakfast.
    The rest of Mikayla's month at the Temple was divided between chanting the daily
    rituals and learning the part of the Youngest Daughter for next year's Spring
    Festival. It was a pleasant, tranquil life, and she was almost sorry when her
    month was up and it was time for her to return to the world outside, especially
    since she suspected that it was her duty to return to the Tower and see how
    Haramis and Uzun fared.
    But it was time for her to leave. Red-Eye fetched her just after dark, after the
    ritual of the Hour When the Sun Embraces the Sacred Peak, and took her straight
    to Haramis's Tower. "Did Fiolon tell you to bring me here?" Mikayla asked it.
    "Yes," the bird replied. "He says you are needed here."
    "Oh dear." Mikayla sighed, slipping from the bird's back onto the balcony.
    Red-Eye held out a claw so that she could disentangle her sphere from it. She
    replaced the sphere around her neck and hugged the great bird. "Fly well,
    Red-Eye, and good hunting."
    "Be well, Mika," the bird said as it took off into the night.
    Mikayla crept quietly indoors and made it to the sanctuary of her room unseen.
    She had missed supper at the Temple, but she didn't feel inclined to roam about
    searching for food. She would rather go hungry than have to face anyone in the
    Tower that night.
    Chapter Twenty-Two
    Mikayla woke suddenly. She knew at once that it was about two hours before dawn,
    and despite the heating in the Tower her room was cold from the autumn chill.
    Something was very wrong; she could feel it. She tried to narrow it down, to
    move from feeling generalized uneasiness, verging on terror, to focus and
    determine exactly what was wrong.
    Then her bed was being shaken violently from side to side, but her room was
    still completely dark. She called out, "Who's there?" but no one answered, and
    she felt silly. If anyone had been in her room, she would have known.
    After what seemed like several long minutes, but was probably actually less than
    a minute, the shaking stopped. Mikayla sat up in bed, called up a light, and
    took stock of her surroundings. The pillow, which she had shoved away in her
    sleep, had fallen onto the floor, but the room appeared otherwise intact. It was
    an earthquake, Mikayla thought. That was what had wakened her, the sense that a
    major earthquake was about to occur.
    But there couldn't be an earthquake, especially here. There must be some other
    answer. Was this some magic Haramis was working without her? Was Haramis
    recovered enough to work magic?
    It had been half a year since Mikayla had left the Temple of Meret and returned
    to the Tower. Guardswoman Nella and Lady Bevis had returned to the Citadel about
    a month after Mikayla's return, saying that the Lady was recovered enough not to
    need them, but still Mikayla hadn't noticed any sign that Haramis was recovering
    her magical abilities.
    By now Haramis was able to dress and feed herself, if a bit sloppily, and she
    could walk well enough to go down to her study and spend hours sitting talking
    to Uzun. Uzun was still a harp, although Fiolon had kept his promise and had the
    harp repaired while Haramis was still confined to her bed.
    Mikayla wished she could just lie down again and go back to sleep, but she
    suspected that she was going to be needed very shortly. So she got up, put on
    her robe and slippers, and went to find out what was going on.
    Haramis was not in the workroom, nor in her study, where Mikayla found Uzun
    leaning against the wall. She hurried to restore him to his normal upright
    position. "What happened, Uzun?"
    "That was an earthquake, Princess, and, I fear, an ill omen as well." The harp,
    in a minor key, sounded foreboding. "I am glad that you are here."
    "An earthquake?" Mikayla was incredulous. "We're sitting on top of a league of
    solid rock! How can we have an earthquake here?"
    "We shouldn't," Uzun replied. "Where is the Lady?"
    "I don't know," Mikayla said. "I was looking for her when I came in here. I
    thought she must be working some spell, but she's not in the workroom. And
    surely she can't have slept through this -nobody could have!"
    As if to prove her point, Enya came hurrying in. "There you are, Princess," she
    said. "Are you all right? Is Master Uzun?"
    Mikayla nodded. "Except for the fact that I don't particularly care for being
    awakened two hours before dawn, I'm fine. Have you seen the Lady?"
    Enya frowned. "No, I haven't, and she's usually the first one stirring whenever
    anything strange happens."
    "Maybe we should go find her," Mikayla said hesitantly. "I'm not sure I want to
    disturb her if she's still asleep, but-
    Enya shook her head positively. "She would never have slept through this. We'd
    better go see if she's all right."
    Enya softly opened the door to Haramis's bedroom, then stopped with an
    exclamation of dismay. Mikayla, looking over her shoulder, could see Haramis
    lying on the floor near her bed, clearly visible in the light spilling in from
    the hallway. Together they hurried to the Archimage's side. Her eyes were open,
    and she seemed to recognize them, but when she tried to talk, her speech was so
    slurred as to be unintelligible.
    Enya drew in her breath sharply and made a sign against evil.
    Mikayla forced down the feelings of terror and panic welling up inside her. It's
    another brainstorm, she realized. It has to be- why else would the very land
    shake so? What do I do now? I don't know how to take care of her when she's like
    this! But nobody else around here does either, I'll bet. What if she dies? Is
    this my fault? I haven't done anything to annoy her in months! And even if
    sometimes I wish she were dead, I don't really mean it!
    Mikayla looked from Enya to Haramis and decided at least to try to be practical.
    Enya didn't seem ready to be much help yet; she still seemed to regard what she
    was seeing as an evil spell.
    "Let's get her back into bed," Mikayla suggested. "She can't be comfortable on
    the floor like that."
    It was fortunate that Haramis was not a large woman, for she was almost
    completely deadweight as they lifted her and dragged her into her bed. She
    didn't seem to be able to control her arm and leg on the left side or, for that
    matter, to move them at all. This made Mikayla all the more certain that this
    was the same thing that had happened to Haramis before, at the Citadel. And I
    wish she were there now, she thought. There, at least, they knew how to take
    care of her.
    Once Haramis was safely tucked into bed, Enya's wits seemed to start functioning
    again. "There is an old Healer woman who attends the servants," she said.
    "Perhaps we should summon her. The Lady's hands and feet are very cold; I will
    make her some hot tea and put hot bricks at her feet. That at least could do no
    harm."
    When the tea was brought Haramis could not sit up to drink, so Enya held her
    upright and spooned a little of the hot brew into the Lady's mouth. Mikayla, who
    didn't want to have anything to do with nursing someone who was so sick she
    couldn't move, was happy to accept Enya's suggestion that while she was feeding
    the Lady, Mikayla should go at once to the servants' hall and ask the Oddling
    woman who cared for the servants when they were ill or injured to come at once.
    "Her name is Kimbri," Enya told Mikayla. "The Archimage has always been so
    hearty and healthy that she has never needed a Healer before-not when she was
    here at any rate, and there are no human Healers here."
    Mikayla ran down to the kitchens, grateful for an excuse to be out of the room.
    One of the women there making bread told her that Kimbri had gone down to the
    house of the gardener's wife, whose child was due in a few days. All of the rest
    of the servants seemed to be clustered in the kitchen, comparing notes on how
    the earthquake had wakened them. Mikayla sent the Vispi man who worked in the
    stables to find the Healer, but the way he looked at her reminded her that she
    wasn't dressed. She dashed back to her room and threw on the first clothes that
    came to hand before returning to the hall to watch for the Healer.
    Before very long the Oddling woman appeared. She was a deceptively frail-looking
    Vispi with graying hair done up in a coil over her forehead. Mikayla told her
    what had happened, trying not to sound as upset as she felt.
    The Oddling said peacefully, "Aye, she is not young. I am not at all surprised
    that she has begun to suffer the ills of age. My own grand-dame was so stricken
    when she was ninety. Don't be frightened, little Lady. It is not likely that the
    Lady will die if she is living yet. Those who are struck down like this usually
    die at once; and if not, they may live for a long time. It is quite likely that
    the Lady might go on living for a good many years."
    "I certainly hope so," Mikayla said. "If anything happened to her, I'd be
    Archimage. And I'm nowhere near ready for that yet." She followed Kimbri
    upstairs to the Archimage's room, and Kimbri bent over the old woman's limp body
    and felt for her pulse.
    "There is nothing more we can do," she told Mikayla. "She will live and grow
    stronger or she will not; that is all anyone can do, now."
    "But what causes it?"
    "No one knows. Maybe the Ancients knew, but we have so little of their wisdom."
    "But-isn't there anything we can do?" Mikayla demanded.
    "This happened to her before, at the Citadel, and they treated it with
    swamp-worm venom."
    "Do you know how much they used, how it was administered, and where to get
    some?" Kimbri asked gently.
    Mikayla shook her head.
    "Then all we can do is to be patient," Kimbri said, adding sympathetically,
    "although that is sometimes the hardest thing of all. And try to keep her
    spirits up as much as you can."
    Mikayla thought that might be the most difficult thing to do. She knew well that
    Haramis did not suffer either fools or weakness gladly-if at all. She had a
    feeling that a sick Haramis was going to be a very unpleasant person to be
    around-especially when she recovered enough to start complaining about her
    condition.
    Mikayla was determined that Haramis would recover. It never occurred to her to
    think that if Haramis died, she might then be freed; she knew now that that
    would never happen. She was becoming resigned to being Archimage. But, please,
    not yet, she thought. Not for a long time yet.
    She sighed as she went downstairs to tackle her next task: breaking the news to
    Uzun.
    The harp sobbed like a child, but with a breathy twanging sound.
    "I love her so much," Uzun said at last. "If it were not for her and her magic I
    would long ago have gone to join my ancestors in whatever afterworld there may
    be. For her alone I was willing to stay. Should the Lady be gone, my long life
    will be but a weariness."
    Mikayla, although she felt frightened herself, tried to comfort the ancient
    magician.
    "Don't worry, Uzun; she'll be better soon."
    "Will she? She is far older than I; and all my family and friends are many years
    gone. If anything should happen to her, I would be all alone in the world."
    Mikayla felt like saying, "No you won't, Uzun; I'm still here, and if anything
    should happen to her, I'll need your counsel more than she ever did." But she
    knew that her relationship with Uzun was very different from his with Haramis,
    so she held her tongue.
    And, as if she didn't already have enough to worry about, Mikayla remembered
    that Haramis had once said that when the previous Archimage died, her Tower had
    crumbled immediately into dust-which was why Haramis had come to live in this
    one, built by Orogastus. Mikayla hoped this would not happen to Haramis's Tower.
    She felt younger than ever. She felt as if she would like to break down and cry;
    but in Uzun's sorrow, how could she expect him to care about her troubles? She
    patted the forepillar of the harp, glad that Fiolon had kept his promise to have
    it repaired, and said awkwardly, "Don't cry, Uzun. Some people do get better, so
    Kimbri says. And Haramis got better before. I know she would hate to see you so
    unhappy; so you must be strong for her when she needs you.
    "Sometimes," she added artfully, remembering something else the Healer had said,
    "cheerful company can make all the difference between who lives and who dies. So
    you must be strong, and you must not cry when she needs you. Her mind must be at
    rest, and this would only make her more unhappy."
    Uzun sniffled with a liquid sound of strings. "You are right; I will try to be
    cheerful for her."
    "Good," Mikayla said. She wondered what would happen to Uzun if Haramis did die
    while he was still in the harp, bespelled with her blood. Would he crumble to
    dust, as the old Archimage's Tower and possessions had? She did not, however,
    feel that this was a question she could ask Uzun, and obviously she couldn't ask
    Haramis at present.
    For the next several days it seemed that Haramis grew neither better nor worse.
    The nursing was done by the Oddlings, and Mikayla had very little to do, except
    to try to cheer Uzun, who had stopped weeping, but evidently held out no very
    great hopes for the recovery of the Archimage. For that matter, neither did
    Mikayla, even though the Healer had said that every day a person so stricken did
    not die, the chances were better for her eventual recovery of all her faculties.
    Although she tried to block it out, Mikayla could feel the land nearly all the
    time now. It definitely was not the land sense of an Archimage; she knew what
    Fiolon had with Var, and what she felt was nothing like that strong. She felt as
    though she could hear voices crying in the wind, but couldn't make out the
    words, or as if there were shadows in every corner that vanished when she tried
    to look at them. The land was not happy, and neither was Mikayla.
    * * *
    It was about ten days later, and Mikayla had taken Kimbri's place sitting beside
    Haramis in the old woman's bedroom, for this morning, Kimbri had felt she must
    go and visit her own neglected family and see to her other patients.
    Mikayla felt nervous and very much alone. She had nearly fallen asleep in her
    chair from boredom when she suddenly saw that Haramis's eyes were completely
    open, and that the old woman was watching her.
    Mikayla started a little, and said softly, "My Lady Haramis, are you awake?"
    The old woman's voice sounded slurred and indistinct-and cross. "Yes, of course
    I'm awake; what's the matter with you? And where is Enya? What are you doing
    here?"
    Mikayla wished desperately that Kimbri or Enya-or anybody except herself were
    there. But Haramis's tone was so sharp that she could do nothing but try to
    answer.
    Since she wasn't sure if Haramis even remembered her or knew who she was-after
    all, she hadn't the last time-she tried to avoid any details. "You have been
    very ill, Lady. Shall I go and call Enya for you?"
    "No. Not yet," Haramis said. "How long has it been? Why is Uzun not with me?"
    Mikayla had no idea whether she should say anything to Haramis about how long
    she had been unconscious. But Haramis was looking at her expectantly, so Mikayla
    said, "About ten days, I think, Lady. We were all very frightened for you."
    "And where is Uzun? Why is he not at my side? If he is concerned for me, why
    does he not haul his useless old carcass up the stairs to see me? Or is it too
    far for the old fellow to walk?"
    Mikayla paused, not quite knowing how to answer; but after the first moment of
    confusion, the old Archimage's mind seemed comparatively clear.
    "Oh, yes," she said. "It had slipped my mind for a moment; Uzun cannot walk now,
    of course. Perhaps later, if I cannot go down the stairs, someone can manage to
    drag him up to visit me -but not up those circular stairs. Even when he could
    still walk he had trouble on that staircase. I cannot imagine why Orogastus ever
    had the thing built. He always did prefer style to function and other practical
    considerations."
    She closed her eyes, and seemed to sleep for a moment. Then she said, "And of
    course you cannot carry him. Well, I suppose my need for his counsel must
    overcome my need for repose." She tried to sit up and, after gasping for a
    moment and struggling, said, "Help me to sit upright." She sounded very
    surprised. "I find I cannot sit by myself."
    Mikayla put her arms round the old woman, pulling her to a sitting position, and
    said, "Shall I run down the stairs and tell Uzun that you are asking for him? He
    will be very glad to hear that you are awake. He has been dreadfully concerned
    about you, of course; we all have."
    "Now, what good would that do, when he could not come up and join me?" Haramis
    asked testily. "Why upset the old fellow without cause? Is Kimbri here?"
    "She has gone to see if the gardener's wife is ready to have her child. As soon
    as she comes back I will have her come to you."
    "Don't bother," Haramis said. "It is not for nothing that I was made Archimage."
    Then, without raising her voice, she said, as if speaking to someone in the same
    room, "Kimbri, come here; I need you."
    In a short while, Kimbri came running up the stairs. Mikayla met her at the
    door, and asked softly, "Did you hear the Lady call you?"
    "No," Kimbri whispered back. "I checked on the gardener's wife, and she is doing
    well, so I decided to look in on the Lady. Did she call me?"
    Mikayla nodded. Kimbri said softly, "It seems quite likely that her natural
    faculties would return before her magical ones. Try not to worry about it." She
    continued on into Haramis's room. When she saw the Archimage sitting upright,
    she said, "It is good indeed to see you looking so much better, Lady." As she
    started to examine Haramis Mikayla took the opportunity to slip out of the room
    to tell Uzun the good news.
    She ran down the stairs to the study and found the huge harp apparently dozing.
    They had never decided whether Uzun really slept or not, but since Haramis had
    been ill, Uzun had seemed to be asleep on several occasions when Mikayla tried
    to talk to him.
    "Wake up, Uzun," she cried. "The Archimage is awake, and she asked at once for
    you."
    If it was possible for a wooden harp to look self-satisfied, she would have
    sworn that Uzun looked smug. "You say she has asked for me? I might have guessed
    that would be her first act when she wakened," he said. "Can you take me to
    her?"
    "No." Mikayla sighed. "Haramis doesn't think we can get you up all those stairs.
    And even if she doesn't remember what happened to you last time we dragged you
    up to her room, I do! But I can run messages back and forth for you."
    "I suppose that will have to do." Uzun sighed.
    "Unless you have an ambition to become a pile of kindling wood, it will indeed
    have to do," Mikayla said firmly.
    Chapter Twenty-Three
    Somehow it did not greatly surprise Mikayla that Haramis suddenly forgot her
    previous opposition to giving Uzun a new body.
    The first hint of this change of heart came the next week, when Kimbri came to
    check on the Archimage again. "How are you feeling today, Lady?" she asked
    respectfully.
    "Not well," said Haramis. She sounded tired, and very old. "Certainly not well
    enough to teach Mikayla all the things she must learn before she becomes
    Archimage. At least, not at this moment, but I feel she should not wait any
    longer to learn them." She leaned back and closed her eyes; or rather, Mikayla
    thought, let them fall shut. After a while she said, without opening her eyes,
    "I think what you should learn first, Mikayla, is to keep in touch with the
    whole of this realm with your Sight, through what I have already taught you of
    the use of the scrying bowl. Go then, and fetch it."
    Mikayla went and fetched the silver bowl, filling it to the rim with pure water
    as she had been taught. She did not feel that this would be a good time to
    remind Haramis that she had taught Mikayla to scry the entire realm some years
    ago. She strongly suspected that Haramis didn't remember how long Mikayla had
    been living in her Tower. I suppose it's a good sign that she remembers me at
    all, Mikayla thought, and I certainly don't want to upset her. After all, Kimbri
    said that she should be kept calm-and that's difficult at the best of times.
    When she returned, Haramis asked her, "What would you like most to see in this
    Kingdom?"
    Mikayla stopped to consider that for a moment. It was the first time Haramis had
    ever consulted her about her preferences. What should it be, then? The Skriteks?
    Definitely not. The city ruins toward which she and Fiolon had been seeking on
    that first day when they had met with the Archimage? After a moment she said
    cautiously, "I would like to see how my cousin Fiolon fares."
    Rather weakly, Haramis moved her right hand. "Look, then, into the water."
    Mikayla looked into the bowl, remembering the instructions of the Archimage on
    other occasions. She did remember how to use the bowl, even though she always
    used the sphere around her neck when she was scrying for herself. After a moment
    the reflections of the windows in Haramis's room swirled on the surface of the
    bowl and formed into a tiny picture of Fiolon, cloaked and booted for riding, on
    a gray fronial. Behind him, a smaller fronial trotted, heavily piled with
    luggage.
    Mikayla recognized his surroundings; he was nearby and headed to this Tower. Why
    is he coming here? she wondered. Haramis sends him away every time she sees him.
    Haramis said sharply, "Well, child, what do you see?"
    Mikayla bit her lip. She's obviously not well if she looks at me and sees a
    child, she thought, and telling her that Fiolon is coming here may anger her.
    But she's bound to find out he's here when he arrives-the servants won't lie to
    her, not about this. "Fiolon is coming here, Lady," she said, "with two
    fronials. He's within half a league of the chasm at the edge of the plaza."
    "Those must be the fronials and the baggage I left with his parents on the day I
    called the lammergeiers to rescue you from the Skriteks," Haramis said promptly.
    "No doubt Fiolon is bound here, returning them to me."
    Mikayla stared at her openmouthed, then forced herself to close her mouth.
    Obviously Haramis was once again not living in the present, but at least now
    Mikayla was getting some idea of when Haramis thought she was. At least she's
    not angry that Fiolon is coming here. And she said "his parents"-perhaps she
    thinks he's one of my brothers.
    "Look in the top drawer of the table by my bedside, Mikayla," Haramis instructed
    her. "It contains the little silver blowpipe I use to summon the bridge. By the
    time you reach the bottom of the Tower, he will be here, so go at once."
    Mikayla didn't think he would be here quite that soon, but she was glad enough
    to obey the Archimage-and to get out of the room. She took up the little pipe,
    and hurried down the long stairs to the entrance that let her out on the edge of
    the plaza on the south side of the Tower. She was glad to see that the solar
    cell was clear; she suspected that Orogastus's "magic mirror" might be needed
    very soon. Fiolon would not be coming here without a very good reason.
    As she stood on the plaza waiting for Fiolon's arrival, she had plenty of time
    to consider the state of Haramis's mind. Sometimes, she knew from the Healer,
    old people who suffered this illness lost much of their memory, or could not use
    their powers of speech or reason. This would be likely to make Haramis very
    angry-if she even realized what was happening at all.
    Mikayla quailed to think of Haramis's situation. She had obviously lost at least
    part of her reason and did not seem to know it. She still thought Mikayla was an
    untrained child; the Lord of the Air alone knew what she thought of Fiolon…
    The whole land was without its mother and guide. Well, after a fashion…
    Mikayla stood on the plaza, thinking unhappy thoughts until Fiolon came into
    sight. She blew a note on the pipe, as she had seen Haramis do the first time
    she had sent Fiolon away, so many years ago-years, apparently, that Haramis did
    not remember.
    The bridge extended itself smoothly over the great chasm, almost at the precise
    moment Fiolon and his fronials drew up before it. Mikayla found it hard to wait
    while Fiolon and his fronials crossed the bridge, but as soon as he was there,
    she ran forward to hug him, practically dragging him off his fronial in the
    process.
    "Oh, Fiolon, I'm so glad to see you. It seemed too good to be true when I saw
    you were on your way here!"
    "You knew?" Fiolon said, hugging her back and continuing to hold her. "That
    explains why you were here to meet me. Are you ready to be Archimage yet? I can
    tell that something is seriously wrong with Haramis, is it not?"
    "Yes," Mikayla said, "you're right. You will find her very much changed, I fear,
    and not for the better. She has been very ill, and for a few days we feared she
    would die."
    Fiolon sighed. "Another brainstorm?" he asked. Mikayla nodded. "And you aren't
    anywhere near ready to take her place, I suppose. That would explain the mess."
    Although this was what Mikayla had herself been thinking for some time, she was
    not flattered that this should have been Fi-olon's first thought. She said
    rather snappishly, "I know perfectly well that I'm not ready; Haramis has been
    saying nothing else for the last few days and so has Uzun. Anyone would think I
    was only six years old. Why don't you go up and see her, and then you can all
    agree on how hopeless I am!"
    She stomped off into the stables to press the button that retracted the bridge
    and to tell the groom to take care of the fronials, but when she turned, she
    found Fiolon right on her heels.
    "I'm sorry, Mika," he said, putting an arm around her shoulder. "It must be
    wretched for you, having her like this."
    "Just wait until you see her," Mikayla said with a certain grim satisfaction.
    "And I didn't mean that you couldn't take over as Archimage," Fiolon continued.
    "In fact, I think you should."
    Mikayla stared at him in horror. "But that could kill her!"
    "Perhaps she would rather die than continue what this is doing to the land,"
    Fiolon said gently. "The damage is spilling over into Var. I feel it; that is
    why I came here."
    "I knew you must have a very good reason for coming," Mikayla said, "knowing the
    way Haramis sends you away every time she sees you. But she may not exactly
    remember who you are at the moment-she seems to think you're one of my
    brothers."
    "I shall not disillusion her, then," Fiolon said, "and I promise not to tell her
    that I'm Archimage of Var-she'd probably have a fit. I assume you never told
    her."
    "Of course not," Mikayla said. "Uzun knows, but he won't tell her."
    "All right, then," Fiolon said. "Let's go see how bad it is." He patted her
    gently on the back and gestured for her to proceed.
    The young people toiled up the stairs and into the room of the old woman. "Here
    is Fiolon come to see you, Lady Haramis," Mikayla said formally.
    "Come in, child," Haramis said, weakly extending her right hand toward Fiolon.
    It's the same as it was last time, Mikayla suddenly realized. She can use her
    right side, but not her left. I wonder why that is.
    Fiolon bent over Haramis's hand and kissed the back of it in a courtly fashion.
    "Lady," he replied.
    He's certainly developing polished court manners, Mikayla thought resentfully.
    Of course, he gets to spend time at court; I'm the one who's spending her entire
    life trapped in the mountains.
    She stood in the doorway and glowered while Fiolon made vague social
    conversation, suitable for an elderly lady who couldn't be expected to know
    much, if anything, about what was going on in the world. It would have been
    ridiculous if it hadn't been so pathetic, Mikayla thought as she listened to
    Fiolon assure the Archimage that his parents were in excellent health. Obviously
    Haramis had only the vaguest idea of who he was, or she would have remembered
    that his mother had died in childbirth and that no one had ever known who his
    father was. Well, maybe his father is in excellent health; there's certainly no
    proof to the contrary.
    Haramis tired quickly. Telling Mikayla to have the housekeeper make up a room
    for her brother, she dismissed them both.
    Mikayla, who had already asked Enya to have a room prepared for Fiolon, dragged
    him off to her room for a private conference. The two of them dropped into the
    chairs on either side of the small table next to the fireplace and looked at
    each other in dismay. Then Mikayla groaned, dropping her head onto her forearms
    on the table. "She's really not all here." She sighed.
    "You're right about that, I'm afraid," Fiolon agreed. "When did I become your
    brother?"
    "No doubt when Haramis decided that's what she wanted you to be." Mikayla
    straightened up, scowling. "Some days I really hate her. She decides what she
    wants reality to be, and then she expects everyone to agree with her. And
    everyone does! If she said the sky were green, Uzun and all the servants would
    assure her that it had never been any other color.
    "She keeps telling long repetitive stories of her girlhood. The first three or
    four times they were sort of interesting, but after the twentieth, no!"
    "She forgets what she's said?" Fiolon asked.
    Mikayla nodded. "She's like that first music box we had back at the Citadel when
    we were children, remember? It played the same tune every time you put it on the
    same side. With her you get the exact same speech at intervals. I haven't
    figured out yet just what corresponds to the sides on the music box, but it does
    seem to be an analogous phenomenon. Once I hear the first few words, I can tell
    you the rest of the speech, word for word, inflection for inflection-and I'm so
    sick of it I could scream!
    "Remember the tower at the Citadel where we used to play? We could spend hours
    there and nobody would bother us. Here, if I'm out of her sight for half an
    hour, she sends Enya to find me. She doesn't want me to have any time to myself,
    she doesn't want me to be where she doesn't know where I am, she doesn't even
    want me to be able to think for myself… it really bothers me.
    "It's as if she's trying to wipe out my personality and replace it with her
    own-almost as if she were trying to possess me, as if she's trying to spread her
    soul over two bodies, hers and mine, without any regard for what happens to my
    soul." She shuddered and looked anxiously at him. "I do have a soul of my own,
    don't I, Fio?"
    "Of course you do," Fiolon assured her. "You're probably just upset because
    she's ill. Have you been getting enough sleep? And have you been eating, or is
    the household so upset that you're not getting proper meals again?"
    "I take some fruit or something if I'm hungry," Mikayla said. "As for sleep, I
    almost wish I weren't-I get nightmares and then I wake up and I'm trapped here!"
    "You're not exactly trapped here," Fiolon pointed out. "You never promised to
    stay."
    Mikayla looked at him incredulously. "Of course I'm trapped here-I have been for
    years. I didn't choose to be Archimage- she kidnapped me from my home, brought
    me here, and has been 'teaching' me for years, without ever once asking what I
    wanted."
    "Yes," Fiolon agreed, "she brought you here without your consent-but that was
    years ago. You could have gone home anytime you chose ever since you learned to
    talk to the lammergeiers- and before that, if you were willing to take a fronial
    through all the snow. By now, being here is your choice, even if you haven't
    made it consciously. Think about it, and choose. What are you going to do?"
    "Oh, I have a choice," Mikayla said sarcastically. "For the Lords' sakes, Fio,
    don't you start this. You're supposed to be my friend-I really need a friend,
    and you're the closest thing I've got to one. Don't you take her side, too,
    please don't. I can't stand it; I just can't live like this. This isn't what I
    wanted."
    "What did you want?" Fiolon asked quietly.
    "I don't know anymore," Mikayla sobbed. "I get so confused here. But it can't
    have been this or I wouldn't be so miserable." She tried to think clearly about
    it. "I wanted what everybody wants, I guess: a nice husband-preferably you-a few
    children, a comfortable home someplace, a garden, friends…"
    "You have Uzun," Fiolon pointed out.
    "I'd prefer friends who are a little more ambulatory." Mikayla sighed. "I mean
    Uzun's very nice, but you have to be really fond of music to appreciate him as
    he ought to be appreciated… You were always my best friend, and you know as well
    as I do that the first thing Haramis wanted when she got us here was to send you
    away. She wants me to be alone and totally dependent on her, and it's not fair!"
    "But, Mika, you can summon a lammergeier, can't you? Even at night, Red-Eye
    would fly across two mountain peaks at your first call."
    "That's true."
    "Then it's not that you don't have any choice," Fio pointed out. "You can summon
    a lammergeier, fly to anyplace you want, and never come back. So if you're still
    here after all this time, I'd say you have made a choice. I'm really sorry that
    you're unhappy, but you must have some reason for staying here."
    Mikayla frowned. "This is going to sound crazy, but I think the land wants me."
    "It doesn't sound crazy at all," Fiolon said promptly. "I think it does, too."
    Mikayla looked slightly sick. "Since she took ill this time, I keep thinking
    that I hear it crying-the land, or the winds, or something. I really feel awful,
    but there doesn't seem to be anything I can do about it. I don't have the land
    sense-not the way you do. The problem is that I don't think Haramis has it
    either."
    Fio shrugged. "I don't know. It's not something that you can tell about someone
    else." He touched his fingertips to the spot on his tunic where his sphere was.
    "If you had it, of course, I could tell, but with her, I can't."
    Mikayla's fingers went to the lump at her chest, carefully hidden under at least
    two layers of clothes at all times, the sphere that was twin to Fiolon's. She
    always wore it next to her skin; it was the one thing she had kept from the time
    before her life with Haramis, the singing spheres that she and Fiolon had found
    on their last trip into the Mire. "Are we linked that strongly?" she asked. "I
    keep thinking that I can feel your presence, and hear your voice in the chiming
    noise it makes, but I thought it must be my imagination."
    Fiolon smiled at her. "Mika, the one thing you never did have much of was
    imagination." He shook his sphere gently, making it ring. Mikayla felt hers
    vibrate with it. "It is said that scrying is notoriously unreliable, especially
    for humans, but using this as a link, we can scry each other very clearly. I've
    been following your lessons for years, even some of those chants at the Temple
    of Meret."
    Mikayla groaned, remembering a lot of those lessons. "And you do them a lot
    better than I do, too. When you landed in Var and got the land sense, you could
    cope with it. I spent two days sick in bed just from being linked with you."
    "I think you'd do a lot better if you'd relax and stop fighting the whole
    situation."
    "No doubt."
    "I wonder if there's anything in the library about the effects of having both an
    Archimage and a trained successor."
    "Trained?" Mikayla said. "Me? Everybody agrees that I'm not trained yet."
    "But you've had more training than I had when I became Archimage of Var," Fiolon
    pointed out.
    "You're right," Mikayla said. "Do you suppose that means that I wasn't supposed
    to be trained in the first place? Could that be why Haramis keeps getting
    brainstorms-because there are two of us?"
    "Look in the library," Fiolon suggested.
    "There's nothing in the main library," Mikayla pointed out. "I've read every
    book in it at least once. But if we do some more exploring in the ice caves, we
    may find more of Orogastus's stuff, something that we overlooked before."
    "Good idea," Fiolon said. "According to some of the old stories, he was a lot
    more interested in varied uses of power than Haramis ever was."
    "I believe that," Mikayla said. "And there may be something in the library at
    the Temple of Meret, though what excuse I could come up for wanting that
    information I can't imagine!"
    She looked speculatively at Fiolon. "But how do things go for you? Are you still
    having trouble with the women at court?"
    Fiolon frowned. "I don't pay much attention. None of the girls in Var is really
    seriously interested in me, in spite of the dukedom, especially since I spend
    most of my time there. There are all sorts of stupid stories about my father's
    being a demon or something, and there's certainly no doubt that I'm a bastard."
    "You mean there aren't girls who find that glamorous and romantic?" Mikayla
    teased.
    Fiolon groaned. "I won't deny that there are girls at court who are that stupid,
    Mika, but you know perfectly well that I've never found stupidity attractive. At
    least you have a brain-even if you don't seem to be using it much at the
    moment."
    Unfortunately this reminded Mikayla of her original complaint. "Oh, I don't have
    a brain, Fio," she said with acid sweetness. "Haramis has two: hers and mine. As
    far as she's concerned, I'm a cross between her property and a part of her body.
    "Look at the way she treats Uzun. He was a person once; he was her friend and
    her teacher… and what is he now? Her harp. He can't move on his own, and she can
    pick him up and cart him around anyplace she wants, subject, of course, to the
    difficulty of moving a harp that large.
    "He's a thing, I'm a thing, her servants are things, and you're a nuisance-to
    her, that is, when she remembers who you are. I certainly think of you as a
    person; it's as if you're the only real person here. I'm not even sure that I'm
    a person or that I'll ever be a person again. And you know that as soon as she
    remembers who you are and why you're here, she'll send you away again."
    "You don't know what's been happening in Var," Fiolon said. "I'm not leaving
    this time just because she tells me to. I'm not twelve years old anymore."
    Chapter Twenty-Four
    It's certainly true that she's not in much of a position to throw you out at the
    moment," Mikayla agreed. "But what is happening in Var?"
    "Something is coming down the Great Mutar River and killing all the fish,"
    Fiolon said. "And that's only what is immediately obvious. I was at Let when it
    started, overseeing the timber shipments, and there's a wrongness in the water.
    I sent a message to my uncle the King that I was going to investigate, and then
    I went to the Citadel. I passed through Lake Wum on the way, and every fish in
    the lake is dead-and so are some of the folk who were on or near it when
    whatever it was happened."
    "Wyvilo?" Mikayla asked.
    "Mostly Wyvilo, but some humans died as well, and many more were made very ill."
    Mikayla gasped. "How is that possible?"
    Fiolon looked unhappy. "I don't know. Ruwenda isn't my land, so, while I can
    feel that there is something seriously wrong, I can't feel exactly what it is or
    how to fix it."
    "Couldn't you feel it while you were in Var?"
    Fiolon shook his head. "The problem isn't in Var-that is, Var isn't part of it.
    All I could feel in Var is something horrible coming out of Ruwenda, down the
    river. And I'll tell you one thing," he added, "it would be much worse if the
    prevailing winds blew from Ruwenda to Var instead of the other way. At least I
    was spared the wrongness in the air until I crossed the border. From the Citadel
    I traveled by fronial so that I could go through the Mazy Mire and see how
    things were there." He looked her straight in the eyes. "Mikayla, your land is
    very sick."
    "Haramis's land," Mikayla reminded him. "Not mine."
    "By the Flower, Mika, it's your home!" Fiolon looked appalled. "Don't you care
    about it at all?"
    "What good would it do me to care?" Mikayla shrugged, trying to hide the hurt
    she felt. "Do you actually think Haramis would let me do anything about it? Do
    you know why I was waiting for your arrival?"
    She didn't wait for him to answer the question; he looked confused by it in any
    case. "The reason that I was standing on the plaza waiting for you is that
    Haramis, now that she's ill, has decided she needs to speed up my training.
    She's teaching me to water-scry."
    "What do you mean?" Fiolon asked. "She taught you to water-scry when you first
    came here-four and a half years ago!"
    "I know that," Mikayla pointed out, "and so do you. She doesn't."
    "Oh, no." Further comment seemed beyond him.
    "I'm pretty sure that she doesn't have the land sense anymore," Mikayla added,
    remembering, "and I don't think she's had it since her first brainstorm. When
    you got the land sense for Var, and I asked her a general question about what it
    felt like to have land sense, she asked me quite sharply if I had it for
    Ruwenda."
    "But if she doesn't have it," Fiolon asked, "who does?"
    "I don't know"-Mikayla sighed-"and neither does Uzun-I asked him about it then.
    We think that if someone else had it, we'd know by now, so it must be in
    abeyance somehow. I know I don't have it."
    "Well, even if you don't have the land sense, we've got to do something about
    this mess!"
    "We can try." Mikayla sighed. "Can you make a list of what needs to be fixed?"
    Fiolon made a face and shook his head. "My perceptions of Ruwenda aren't that
    detailed."
    "Detailed!" Mikayla snapped her fingers and bounced to her feet. "Come on," she
    said impatiently, heading out of the room.
    "Where are we going?" Fiolon asked.
    "The mirror. If you want detail, that's definitely the place to get it."
    "You need more clothes if you're going down there," Fiolon pointed out.
    "No I don't," Mikayla said blithely. "Red-Eye taught me to control my body
    temperature last year. You can get warmer clothes for yourself while I get
    parchment and ink, and I'll meet you down there."
    By the time Fiolon arrived in the ice cave that held the mirror, Mikayla was
    sitting cross-legged on the icy floor, directly in front of the mirror,
    scribbling furiously. "I've found what's killing your fish, Fiolon," she said.
    "It's some sort of tiny little plant that produces a powerful poison when the
    conditions are right- which fortunately isn't often. When Haramis had this last
    brainstorm, we had some really bad earthquakes-
    She broke off and spoke to the mirror. "Mirror, display earthquakes during the
    last two months."
    "Working," the mirror replied. A map of Ruwenda appeared with an overlay of pale
    blue lines across it. For several seconds it just sat there, then one spot after
    another sprouted a bright blue dot with jagged lines running out from the dot in
    various directions, but always strongest along the light blue lines.
    "The one here," Mikayla said, reaching up to lay a fingertip on a spot at the
    northwest edge of the Thorny Hell, "was the first one. It happened before dawn
    the morning we found Haramis on the floor in her room. Then they spread through
    most of the northern portion of the Goldenmire." She twisted her upper body to
    look at Fiolon. "Is that the route you took here?"
    Fiolon nodded silently, with a wary look at the mirror.
    "Were there still tremors in the area then?" Mikayla asked.
    He nodded again.
    "How often and how strong?"
    Fiolon looked at the mirror again, and Mikayla suddenly realized what his
    problem was. "It's all right, Fiolon, you can talk without changing the
    pictures. It responds only to requests that start with its name."
    "Its name?" Fiolon asked.
    "Its use-name; if it has a true name, I don't know it," Mikayla explained.
    "Mirror, show abnormal water levels in the Mazy Mire."
    "Working." The picture changed, becoming a black-and-white map of the Mazy Mire
    with varying unusual shades of brown and blue covering most of the white.
    "The blue is where the water is higher than it should be," Mikayla explained.
    "The darker the blue, the deeper the water. The brown is where the land is
    higher than it should be, and gets darker as the land gets higher."
    Fiolon shivered, looking ill. "No wonder the land felt wrong."
    "True," Mikayla agreed. "You were probably lucky to make it here without getting
    lost."
    "I did get lost," Fiolon admitted. "Several times. I just used my sphere to
    track yours whenever I couldn't recognize where I was. That way I knew we'd at
    least end up in the same place, wherever you might be. It's not as if you're
    always here, you know," he pointed out. "There was your little half-year side
    trip to Red-Eye's cave on Mount Rotolo, to say nothing of the time you spend at
    the Temple of Meret."
    "Which is a month every spring, and can be predicted," Mikayla pointed out. "But
    I think we're going to have to leave here to fix as much of this as we can. Lake
    Wum alone is going to take a lot of work."
    Fiolon groaned. "Let's eat dinner first, shall we?"
    Mikayla chuckled. "By all means. You must be starved." She rose to her feet,
    gathered up her writing materials, and spoke to the mirror. "Mirror, thank you.
    Recharge."
    "Hiatus for recharge," the mirror replied, going dark.
    Mikayla led the way back to the Tower, controlling the lamps in the hallway with
    whispered commands.
    "Do you talk to everything around here?" Fiolon asked.
    "Most of the things, yes," Mikayla said. "The people, not much. Enya's pretty
    busy, the other servants ignore me, and as for Haramis…" She sighed and did not
    finish the sentence.
    As they passed the kitchen Enya popped out. "There you are, Princess," she said.
    "You are to go to the Lady's room at once; she's been asking for you for the
    past two hours."
    Mikayla made a "what did I tell you?" face at Fiolon and assured Enya she would
    go see the Lady immediately.
    "She's ordered dinner served in her room," Enya added.
    Mikayla nodded and continued up the stairs, waiting until she was out of Enya's
    hearing before mumbling, "Oh, joy," in her most sarcastic tones.
    "Mika, show some respect," Fiolon reproved her. "She can't be that bad."
    "If we both weren't needed to repair the damage to the land," Mikayla said, "I'd
    let you stay here in my place and see for yourself. As it is, we'd better
    transfer Uzun to his new body, and leave him to sit with her and listen to her
    stories."
    "Will she let us do that?" Fiolon asked. "Last time she wouldn't allow it."
    "This time," Mikayla replied firmly, "I'm not planning to ask her permission. If
    Uzun agrees to the transfer, I'll do it, even if I have to do it alone." She
    looked questioningly at Fiolon.
    "If you do it," he said, "I'll help. Any ritual from the Temple of Meret
    probably needs as many people as possible."
    "Thanks." Mikayla smiled at him, then composed her face to blankness as they
    entered Haramis's room.
    "Where have you been, girl?" Haramis demanded.
    "Downstairs," Mikayla replied quietly.
    "Didn't it occur to you that I might want you?"
    "I'm sorry if you needed me and I was not here," Mikayla said politely, avoiding
    the question Haramis had actually asked. Fortunately Enya came in then with
    dinner, so Mikayla was spared the rest of the harangue, at least for the moment.
    Haramis spent most of dinner complaining about how much she missed Uzun and why
    couldn't she be carried down to the study so that she could visit him, since he
    couldn't visit her. Mikayla was relieved to note that Haramis apparently had
    some trace of memory that prevented her from demanding that Uzun be brought to
    her room again. Even if she doesn't remember why, she thought, at least Haramis
    doesn't consider dragging the harp up here to be an option. Thank the Lords of
    the Air; I couldn't stand it if he were damaged again.
    "Perhaps in a few days, Lady," she said, "we can arrange for you to see him. In
    the meantime you need to rest and recover your strength, so we shall bid you
    good night." She stood up, and sent the dirty dishes down to the kitchen with an
    unobtrusive wave of her hand. Fiolon bowed to Haramis and followed Mikayla from
    the room.
    "Do you feel up to fetching the body now," Mikayla whispered to him once they
    were alone in the hall, "or are you too tired?"
    "I can help you carry it up," Fiolon replied, "but we should probably wait until
    morning to start the ritual."
    "Agreed," Mikayla said, "but I think we need to have the body at the same
    temperature as the harp for the transfer, so if we leave it next to Uzun
    tonight, it should be ready by morning."
    "Sounds reasonable," Fiolon agreed. "Let's go get it."
    "There's just one thing we need to do first," Mikayla said, pulling Fiolon into
    the study as they passed it. "Uzun," she said, "it's Mikayla and Fiolon."
    "Lord Fiolon," the harp said. "This is a pleasant surprise! What brings you
    here?"
    "Troubles with the land, I'm afraid," Fiolon replied.
    "I feared that would happen when the Lady took ill." Uzun sighed. "I wish I
    could go to her; I am certain she misses me."
    "At least this time she remembers that you're a harp," Mikayla said, "so she's
    not as ill as she was that time at the Citadel. And she seems to realize that
    dragging you up to her room again will damage you. But you are correct; she did
    spend dinner complaining about how much she misses you."
    "If only there were something I could do about it." Uzun's strings positively
    jangled with frustration.
    "Maybe there is," Mikayla said. "Remember the body I got for you at the Temple
    of Meret?"
    "I thought Haramis had destroyed it," Uzun said.
    Mikayla looked at Fiolon. "It's still where we left it," he said. "I checked on
    my way to the ice caves, and the wrappings look intact."
    Mikayla walked over to the bookshelf and tilted several books forward. The
    scroll from the Temple was still behind them, right where she had put it when
    she first brought it home. "We will bring the body up here and unwrap it, Uzun,"
    she said, "and make certain that it has not been damaged. If it is not damaged,
    are you willing to take the risk of attempting to transfer to it?"
    "How is the transfer done?" Uzun asked.
    Mikayla unrolled the beginning of the scroll and scanned it hastily. "I have the
    instructions for the ritual here," she said. "The process appears to be similar
    to the one Haramis used to put you into the harp."
    "Then I want to try it," Uzun said. "Just remember your promise to me, in case
    anything goes wrong."
    "If anything goes badly wrong, I'll set your spirit free," Mikayla said. "I
    promise." She placed the scroll back in its hiding place. "Come, Fiolon, let's
    go get the body."
    It took most of an hour to carry the body upstairs and unwrap it. Fortunately,
    by that time all the servants had gone to bed, so there was no one to interrupt
    them.
    "This is a true work of art," Fiolon said, admiring the painted wooden body as
    he bent each of its joints in turn to be certain that they were all functional.
    "It looks just like you. Master Uzun -at least it looks just like the pictures
    the mirror showed me of you and Haramis." He looked at Mikayla across the body.
    "It seems to be in fine shape to me." He yawned and apologized.
    "Why don't you go to bed now, Fiolon?" Mikayla suggested. "I'll sleep here
    tonight to make sure that nothing is disturbed. And I want to read through the
    ritual before I sleep, anyway."
    "That's fine with me," Fiolon said. "Good night."
    "Sleep well," Mikayla replied. "I'll be locking the door when you leave, so call
    me with your sphere before you come down in the morning."
    "All right." Fiolon headed toward the room assigned to him, and Mikayla locked
    the door, added another log to the fire, retrieved the scroll, and sat down to
    read it. She read the chants silently, but the directions out loud so that Uzun
    would know what to expect.
    When she had finished, she turned to him. "Do you still want to do this?" she
    asked formally. "You can refuse, you know."
    "I've wanted to do this for years," Uzun pointed out. "I'm not going to back out
    now."
    "You do realize that you won't be aware of most of the ritual, don't you?"
    Mikayla pointed out. "Once we've begun the first step, removing the bone from
    the harp, you won't know anything more until we've finished successfully."
    "What time is it now?" Uzun asked.
    Mikayla could feel it, but she moved to the window and checked the position of
    the stars in the night sky anyway. "About two hours before midnight," she
    replied.
    "Then, since the first step involves soaking the skull fragment from midnight
    until dawn in a bowl of tears, you might as well start now," Uzun said.
    "Otherwise you'll have to wait until tomorrow night, and you'll lose an entire
    day. And," he added tartly, "you may not have that day to lose. I know that you
    and Fiolon will have to go out into the land as soon as I am free to look after
    Haramis."
    "You are truly wise, Uzun," Mikayla said. "I'll start setting up now then. Do
    you think that Haramis's scrying bowl from the workroom would be appropriate for
    the tears?"
    "Yes, I think it would be most appropriate," Uzun replied.
    Mikayla visualized the bowl in the workroom where she had left it, and then
    visualized it in her hands. The bowl landed in her outstretched hands with a
    soft puff of displaced air. Mikayla looked at the scroll again to double-check
    the first instruction. "Soak the skull fragment from midnight until dawn in a
    silver bowl, with the bone covered completely by the tears of a maiden who
    mourns the person's death."
    Mikayla bent her face over the bowl and thought of Uzun, of all his kindness to
    her, of his unwavering friendship and loyalty, of his courage in the face of
    damage and of Haramis's illnesses. She thought of how she would feel if this
    ritual failed and he were gone from her life for ever. Her tears fell freely,
    filling the bowl.
    She didn't know how long she cried; it seemed that all the pain of the land
    flowed through her, in addition to all the pain she had ever felt in her life,
    and the pain she felt for Uzun. She cried until her body seemed desiccated, as
    if not another tear remained in her. Her face and eyes were dry now, so dry that
    she had to blink several times to get her eyes to focus.
    She looked at the bowl in her hands. It was filled almost to the brim. She set
    it aside and checked the time. It was almost midnight.
    "The bowl of tears is ready, Uzun," she said. "Are you?"
    "Yes." The harp strings quivered a little, but Mikayla didn't blame Uzun for
    that. If she had strings, she knew that they would be quivering more than just
    that little bit.
    She climbed onto a chair so that she could reach the top of the harp's
    forepillar easily. Carefully, using the ends of her fingernails, she lifted out
    the fragment of bone that was all that was left of Uzun's original body. She
    carried it to the bowl and watched the night sky. At the instant of midnight,
    she immersed the skull fragment in her tears, and the bowl was filled precisely
    to the brim.
    Chapter Twenty-Five
    Mkayla dozed fitfully on the sofa by the fire until shortly before dawn. Then
    she used her sphere to wake Fiolon.
    "Mika, it's not even dawn yet," he complained, "and I've been traveling for
    weeks. Can't we wait until later to start?"
    "I'm sorry, Fio," Mikayla said sympathetically, "but Uzun insisted on starting
    last night. I'm going to need you within the hour. And on your way down," she
    added, "please tell Enya that we will be working in the study with Uzun all day
    and don't wish to be disturbed for anything-including Haramis."
    "What about meals?" Fiolon protested.
    "Bring a tray of food, enough to last us all day," Mikayla said. "We don't want
    to be interrupted to be asked if we're ready for lunch when we're in the middle
    of the ritual."
    "All right." Fiolon sighed. "I'll be there soon."
    Mikayla went to the window to watch for dawn. As soon as the first gleam of sun
    was visible, she lifted the skull fragment out of the bowl and set it on a cloth
    beside the body. Then she picked up a small box that had been in the package
    with the body, and began to lay out the supplies in it: a jar of ointment, a
    white robe with embroidered symbols, only some of which Mikayla recognized from
    her time at the Temple, a black chisel made of some very sharp stone, and a long
    thin knife made of the same material.
    By the time everything was ready, Fiolon had arrived. Mikayla let him in and had
    him set the tray of food on the table. She was much too nervous to eat. Oddly
    enough, Fiolon, who could usually eat anytime there was food available, seemed
    to share her feelings. Ignoring the food, he asked, "What do we do now?"
    Mikayla handed him the scroll. "Read the first spell while I anoint the body."
    "Soak the skull in virgin's tears?" Fiolon said in surprise, looking at the
    scroll.
    "That part's done," Mikayla said. "Start where it says 'I have plowed the sky…'
    "
    She took the ointment and began to rub it carefully over every part of the body
    while Fiolon read. Her hands tingled, but she couldn't be sure whether this was
    due to power running through them or to something in the ointment. It felt very
    strange.
    Fiolon was reading the spell, but his voice sounded different, as if some power
    were speaking through him. "I have plowed the sky, I have harvested the horizon,
    I have traveled the Land to its far boundaries, I have taken possession of my
    spirit, because I am one who retains my magic. I see with my eyes, I hear with
    my ears, I speak with my mouth, I reach with my arms, I grasp with my hands, I
    run with my legs."
    Mikayla finished anointing the body, dressed it in the robe provided, and
    propped it up into a sitting position in a chair. Already she was getting a
    sense of it as real, rather than a simple statue.
    She picked up the skull fragment and carefully coated both sides of it with the
    ointment, nodding to Fiolon to read the next section.
    "I have kept in my body those things which I had in the past; now I use them to
    appear in glory."
    Mikayla set the skull fragment carefully back on the cloth, picked up the sharp
    knife, climbed on the chair, and scraped out a bit of the inside of the hole in
    the forepillar of the harp. She stirred the material, a combination of wood and
    Haramis's dried blood, into the bowl of tears. Then she took the point of the
    knife and jabbed her fingertip. Holding her hand over the bowl, she squeezed
    exactly seven drops of her own blood into it, then made her finger stop bleeding
    and the wound close up. She remembered Uzun teaching her and Fiolon how to do
    simple healing spells during one of their late-night sessions her first year at
    the Tower, and thought how fitting it was that this knowledge should be used to
    help Uzun in turn. She handed the knife to Fiolon, who followed her example,
    then took up the scroll again.
    Mikayla stirred the liquid together so that her tears and everyone's blood were
    completely mingled together. Then she lifted the bowl and poured its contents
    into the hole left in the top of the body's head, which ran through the head and
    neck and down to where the heart should be. The liquid looked strange, like fire
    would look, if it could be liquid, Mikayla thought. Heat seemed to radiate from
    it, and Mikayla half expected it to start steaming, like water boiling over a
    fire.
    The liquid filled the channel completely as Fiolon read the next spell. "Hail to
    Thee who endures in power, Lady of all hidden things. Behold, all wrong is
    washed away from my heart, and my heart is born anew, born of the blood of those
    that love me. May I live on it as Thou livest on it; be gracious unto me, and
    grant me life."
    Mikayla picked up the skull fragment, holding it carefully-the ointment had made
    it a bit slippery and her hands were trembling. This was the most important part
    of the ritual; the joining of the old body with the new one. There weren't even
    words for it; this part she had to feel in her heart.
    The bone was so warm in her hands that it threatened to burn them, but Mikayla
    forced herself to ignore the pain. Power seemed to run through her entire body;
    she felt both hot and cold at the same time.
    She placed the bit of skull carefully into place, praying without words that
    this magic would work and that Uzun would live again. The bone seemed to spread
    slightly under her fingers, or perhaps the wood closed in on it, as the two
    pieces fused together. Holding her breath, she looked at the face. Uzun's eyes
    looked back at her, and there was intelligence behind them. Mikayla let out her
    breath in a sigh of relief, and turned to pick up the sharp stone chisel.
    She ran it gently between the lips of the body as Fiolon read the spell for
    opening the mouth. "I have arisen from the egg which is hidden, my mouth has
    been given to me that I may speak with it in the presence of the Goddess. My
    mouth is opened by Meret and what was on my mouth has been loosened by her
    Chosen One. My mouth is opened, my mouth is split open by the fingertip of the
    Land. I am one with the great winds of the sky, and I speak with my true voice."
    Mikayla set down the chisel with a trembling hand, Fiolon rolled up the scroll,
    concentrating on it as if he didn't dare to look up.
    "Is that it?" Master Uzun inquired. "Are you quite done?"
    Both of them looked at him and collapsed to sit on the floor, limp with reaction
    and relief. "It worked," Fiolon whispered, his voice somewhere between awe and
    exhaustion.
    Uzun stood up and began to move about the room, testing his new body. His
    movements were jerky at first, but quickly smoothed out with a little practice,
    as if he were working out the stiffness of a body that had just wakened in the
    morning.
    He looked from Mikayla to Fiolon, then picked up the tray of food and set it on
    the floor between them. "Eat!" he commanded. "You both look ready to fall over,
    and there is still the Land to be dealt with."
    An hour later both Mikayla and Fiolon had eaten and were feeling considerably
    more human. "Now," Uzun said firmly, "we go talk to the Lady Haramis. The land
    has no time to waste."
    "This should be interesting," Mikayla murmured softly as they followed Uzun up
    the stairs to Haramis's room.
    Fiolon was still admiring the new body, watching the way it moved. "That is the
    most incredible workmanship I have ever seen," he marveled. "And they just gave
    it to you?"
    "In return for my remaining a virgin and spending a month each spring in their
    Temple for the next seven years," Mikayla reminded him. "And this coming spring
    I'm to represent the Goddess in the Spring Festival."
    "How did you get picked for that?"
    "There's a ritual where the Goddess chooses which of her Daughters will do it,"
    Mikayla replied briefly, just as they reached Haramis's room and had to drop
    that line of conversation.
    Haramis looked confused to see them. No wonder, Mikayla thought. She doesn't
    remember Fiolon much, and last time she saw Uzun, he was a harp.
    "Uzun?" Haramis said in bewilderment. "I must have been dreaming-I thought I
    turned you into a harp…"
    Uzun took her hand between his. Mikayla almost felt sorry for Haramis; it must
    have been a shock to discover that his hands were made of wood. "You did, Lady,"
    he said, "but that was long ago. Now I have a new body, and I can see and move
    again." He drew up a stool and sat at the head of her bed, still holding her
    hand.
    "I fear that I bring ill news, Lady," he said softly. "There is great sickness
    in the land."
    Haramis frowned, and tried, unsuccessfully, to sit up. "I felt earthquakes," she
    said. "What else?"
    "The shape of the earth and water in the Goldenmire has changed," Mikayla said,
    "and there is some sort of poison in Lake Wum that kills fish and folk-even
    humans."
    "Alas," said Haramis, "that I have come to this. I have no power to protect or
    heal my land."
    "Then you will have to allow them to do it," Uzun said firmly.
    Haramis looked at him as if he had taken leave of his senses. "Uzun, they're
    children!"
    "They are less than two years younger than you were when you became Archimage,"
    Uzun pointed out, "and both you and I have been training them. Perhaps neither
    one could accomplish the task alone, but together I believe that they can repair
    at least the worst of the damage. I shall advise them, with your consent, Lady."
    Uzun did not sound as if he were asking for Haramis's permission.
    Haramis was clearly too tired and weak to protest. "Very well, Uzun, do as you
    wish. You always did," she added querulously.
    "Thank you, Lady." Uzun bent to kiss her hand, then dragged Mikayla and Fiolon
    out of the room and back to the study, where he tugged the bellpull and ordered
    Enya to bring dinner for Mikayla and Fiolon.
    Enya looked at him in astonishment, then turned to Mikayla. "Who is this,
    Princess-another of your odd friends?"
    Of course she doesn't recognize him, Mikayla realized. None of the servants has
    ever seen him as anything except a harp! "This is Master Uzun, Enya," she said
    firmly, "and it is the Lady's will that you continue to obey his requests."
    "Master Uzun." Enya looked dubious but prepared to go along with this. "And do
    you require food as well, Master Uzun?"
    Uzun looked at Mikayla, who shook her head slightly. "No," he replied. "This
    body does not require food."
    Enya left the room, shaking her head in disbelief. "This household gets stranger
    every day," she muttered.
    "Now," Uzun said briskly, "what needs to be done with the land?"
    "The Goldenmire is greatly changed," Mikayla said, "but it is sparsely peopled.
    Any harm that was going to happen there has already happened. We can't bring the
    dead back to life, and the living are already adjusting to the way the Mire is
    now."
    "I agree," Fiolon said. "I traveled through there on my way here, and I don't
    think we need do anything to it. The real problem is Lake Wum."
    "The mirror says that if the fish are all dead, then the fish-death will be dead
    as well," Mikayla said.
    "Fish-death?" Uzun asked.
    "It's some sort of tiny plant that produces poison," Fiolon explained.
    "So we need to put fish back into Lake Wum," Mikayla said. "Master Uzun, have
    you any suggestions as to where we should get more fish?"
    "Was there much damage near the Bonorar River?" Uzun asked.
    "No." Mikayla shook her head. "The Dylex region is far enough to the east of us
    that it was spared most of the disturbances caused by the Archimage's illness."
    "And the Bonorar flows into Lake Wum anyway," Fiolon said. "So if the fish are
    upriver and we move them down to the lake, that should start to build up the
    fisheries again."
    Enya came in with dinner then, and everyone fell silent while Mikayla and Fiolon
    ate. Even Uzun seemed lost in his own thoughts.
    "We can fly there," Fiolon continued, sending his empty dishes back to the
    kitchen, "check to be certain that the lake water is clean again, and then take
    a few fishing nets upstream and bring some fish to the lake."
    "That probably would be better than trying to teleport living creatures,"
    Mikayla agreed, sending her dishes to the kitchen with a flick of her hand.
    "But there's one problem you are both overlooking," Uzun said unhappily. "What
    will the folk think-especially the Skritek and the Glismak-if you are seen
    flying about on lammergeiers and doing the Lady's work? What will they think of
    the Lady?"
    "Probably the truth," Mikayla said.
    "I can handle the Glismak," Fiolon said at the same time.
    "Do we really want the folk of the Land to know how sick the Archimage is?" Uzun
    asked quietly.
    "It probably would be better if they didn't guess," Mikayla said after a few
    minutes' thought. "Faith can be a powerful force, regardless of the reality
    behind it."
    "Especially if it means we don't have to cope with a Skritek uprising," Fiolon
    added wryly.
    Mikayla shuddered. "You're right about that," she agreed. "So we'd better do
    this by night and make sure we're not seen."
    "But the lammergeiers can't fly at night," Fiolon protested, "and it would take
    months of travel by fronial, especially if we're trying to stay hidden."
    "Red-Eye flies at night," Mikayla pointed out.
    "You're right," Fiolon said. "And he's certainly large enough to carry both of
    us. But would he be willing?"
    "I'll just have to ask him," Mikayla said. "After all, we don't have half a year
    to do this; I have to be back at the Temple of Meret in less than two months."
    Red-Eye agreed to help its friend Mikayla, with a touch of smugness that there
    was something it could do that an ordinary lammergeier couldn't. It arrived
    shortly after darkness the next night and landed them near Tass Town, at the
    southern end of Lake Wum, just before dawn.
    While it spent the day asleep in a tree in the darkest part of the Greenmire it
    could find, Mikayla and Fiolon, dressed in waterproofed boots, loose pants
    tucked into their boots, and oiled leather hooded jackets, suitable for grubbing
    through the swamp, wandered about the edge of the lake, checking on the
    condition of the water as well as that of the vegetation surrounding the lake.
    They found that the mirror had been right; the lake was clean of fish-death and
    had enough small plants growing again to support fish. So that night they
    borrowed several fishing nets from a dock in Tass Town, flew up the Bonorar as
    far as the Dylex, and brought back several nets full of fish of various sizes.
    Red-Eye's flying skills were incredible, Mikayla noted. It managed to drag the
    nets of fish the length of the river without ever pulling them out of the water,
    catching the nets on rocks or tree roots, or doing anything that would harm the
    fish. About an hour before dawn they reached Lake Wum and deposited the fish in
    the center of the lake, hoping that this would give them a chance to multiply
    before the local fishermen discovered them. Red-Eye dropped Mikayla and Fiolon
    off in Tass Town so that they could return the nets and went back to its
    temporary roost in the Greenmire.
    The three of them spent the next several weeks flying about the land, checking
    for damage that needed to be put right. But they quickly discovered that the
    Land seemed to be healing itself.
    "I wonder if the Land's health is tied to Haramis's," Mikayla said to Fiolon one
    evening as they waited for Red-Eye to wake and come for them.
    Fiolon, who had been using his sphere to bespeak Uzun every morning, nodded
    thoughtfully. "I think it may well be," he said. "Master Uzun says that Haramis
    is recovering well."
    "I'm glad," Mikayla said. "By the time I get back from the Temple, she may be
    feeling more charitable toward me."
    "Do you have to go back there?" Mikayla looked up and saw that Red-Eye had
    landed silently behind her.
    "You know I do, Red-Eye," she said. "I promised. And this is the year I have to
    represent the Goddess in the Spring Festival."
    Red-Eye sighed. "Just remember your promise to bespeak me every night," he said.
    "When must you go?"
    "Tonight," Mikayla said. "I'll need to be there before dawn."
    "I'll stop off at the Tower and report to Master Uzun if Red-Eye doesn't mind
    taking me there," Fiolon said. "Uzun can decide how much to tell the Lady. Then
    I'll have to go back to Mutavari and report to the King. After that, I'll
    probably be back in Let for the summer and fall."
    "Then we had better fly," Red-Eye said, extending a wing.
    Chapter Twenty-Six
    After all the excitement and crises of the last months, Mikayla found it very
    pleasant to be back at the Temple of Meret. As she had promised, she bespoke
    Red-Eye every night, even though she had nothing to tell him. It was virtually
    no different from the previous year.
    She took the Youngest Daughter's part in the Spring Festival, representing the
    Goddess in the procession, and spent most of the day being carried about by the
    young men of the Temple on a richly carved high-backed wooden throne while the
    other Daughters, dressed in green robes, walked on either side of the throne
    carrying fans that prevented most of the congregation from seeing whether she
    was sitting there at all. She didn't even have to sing the chants for the
    Festival that she had learned the previous year.
    She dutifully reported this to Red-Eye, along with her opinion that the ritual
    was even more boring for the Youngest Daughter. "I could be replaced with a fan,
    and no one would know the difference."
    "I'm glad to hear that," Red-Eye said. "Perhaps that will discourage you from
    volunteering to do it again."
    "We don't volunteer," Mikayla reminded him. "The Goddess chooses whomever She
    wants. But I'm glad to be done with it."
    When the Husband of the Goddess Meret came to the Daughters' room for the
    Choosing, and someone else was chosen as the Youngest Daughter for next year,
    Mikayla was happy to move down one place in the order.
    She spent the rest of the month enjoying the peace and quiet and the orderly
    life imposed by the rituals. At the end of the month, Red-Eye came for her again
    and took her back to the Tower.
    Having Uzun for company had improved Haramis's temper considerably. The harp
    that had formerly been his body still functioned perfectly well as a harp, and
    Haramis had recovered enough to walk down the stairs to the study each morning.
    She spent her days on the couch, listening to Uzun play and sing his old ballads
    to her, and then climbed back up the stairs to her own bed at night. She seemed
    perfectly happy to live her life in this fashion and didn't seem to care about
    anything else.
    She bid Mikayla welcome, refrained from asking where she had been, and said
    nothing about further training for her. Now that she had her old friend Uzun
    back, she seemed quite indifferent to Mikayla's actions, or indeed, to her
    whereabouts.
    Mikayla took advantage of this disinterest to spend her afternoons in the ice
    caves studying the mirror and some of the other devices left there. Now that she
    and the mirror understood each other-and now that she had learned to read well
    enough to recognize warning labels on old containers-she was able to poke
    through the storeroom without having to worry about setting anything on fire or
    blowing the Tower up. She spoke to Fiolon in the evenings, using her sphere,
    which Red-Eye had returned to her when he brought her back from the Temple,
    keeping Fiolon apprised of anything interesting that she found. Fiolon, in turn,
    told her of life at court in Var, and of the logging operations he was still
    running when he wasn't in court. He seemed to find the court in Mutavari rather
    boring, for he was most often in Let, his own dukedom.
    "It seems strange," he told her, laughing, "to be assigned a portion of the Land
    and told that I'm responsible for it. The King doesn't know that I'm responsible
    for his entire Kingdom."
    "That's probably just as well," Mikayla pointed out. "In a Kingdom without a
    tradition of having an Archimage, he might regard you as a threat to his crown."
    "Really, Mika"-Fiolon laughed-"be serious. We're only seventeen years old."
    "I am serious," Mikayla said. "I've been reading the history of Labornok, and
    they have executed children for high treason. We're not children, even if we are
    growing more slowly than normal."
    "At least we are growing," Fiolon said. "I never did get a chance to tell you,
    but I found out why a sorcerer grows so slowly. It's just because we live so
    much longer than normal people, that's all-it doesn't mean that we'll be
    children forever. Even as young as we started, we should be physically mature by
    the time we're thirty at the latest."
    "That's a relief," Mikayla admitted. "The thought of looking like a child of
    twelve for the next two hundreds wasn't appealing."
    Mikayla frequently slipped out at night to go flying with Red-Eye, until it
    seemed to her that she knew the land by night better than she did by day. But
    she enjoyed its company, and it seemed to enjoy hers.
    Life was good that year, until one morning in the early spring, when Mikayla
    woke suddenly before dawn, moments before an earthquake hit.
    "Oh, no, not again!" she groaned, rolling out of bed and running for Haramis's
    room. Uzun arrived right behind her, with Enya only a few minutes behind him.
    Mikayla left them to put Haramis back to bed and send for Kimbri-not that she
    thought there was much the Healer could do-while she went to the ice caves and
    had the mirror show her where damage was occurring in the land.
    Mikayla knew that Haramis would have used the sand table for this task, but
    Mikayla didn't share Haramis's prejudice against technology. The mirror would
    show her what was happening in the land without her having to expend the energy
    required to sense the land's condition through the sand table. All she needed to
    do the repair work-aside from a lot of her own energy-was a clear visualization
    of what she was doing, and that could be done more easily with the mirror as
    well. This meant that nearly all of Mikayla's energy could be devoted to the
    work that actually needed to be done. She spent the rest of the day damping down
    earthquakes and aftershocks, diverting flooding rivers away from populated
    areas, and hoping that this time the conditions wouldn't be right for fish-death
    to return.
    Several hours after dark, when she was feeling cold and tired, having exhausted
    her usual ability to control such physical failings, Fiolon came in, bundled up
    in warm clothing and carrying a mug of hot ladu-juice.
    "Red-Eye fetched me," he explained. "Drink this, go eat something, and go to
    bed. I'll take the next watch."
    "Thank you," Mikayla said, rubbing her cold hands together until she had enough
    feeling in them to hold the mug. "Watch the spot where the Nothar River runs
    into the Upper Mutar-it's been threatening to flood for the last four hours. And
    we're still getting aftershocks from the earthquake, all over the place."
    "I'll take care of it," Fiolon said. "You eat and get some sleep."
    Mikayla just nodded as she staggered toward her room.
    She relieved Fiolon shortly after dawn, and for the next few days they took
    turns so that one of them was always watching and ready to fix any damage. After
    a few days, the worst was over and the aftershocks had subsided enough so that
    they couldn't be felt by anyone who didn't have land sense. Uzun volunteered to
    watch the mirror while they both got some badly needed rest.
    "I'm so glad that they made him strong enough to withstand these temperatures,"
    Mikayla remarked to Fiolon as they went up the tunnel back to the Tower. "In his
    natural form he would have frozen to death there."
    "It certainly helps," Fiolon agreed. "How many more years do you have to go back
    to the Temple to finish paying for this?"
    Mikayla counted on her fingers. "I've done two, so that leaves five more. I'll
    be twenty-one my last year there."
    "How long before you have to go back there this year?"
    Mikayla groaned. "Two weeks. I'd really better get some rest."
    "I'll stay here while you're gone," Fiolon volunteered. "Uzun may need some
    help. He's a decent enough magician, but land magic's a bit different."
    So Mikayla went back to the Temple of Meret for the third year. It was peaceful
    enough, and it gave her much-needed respite from holding Ruwenda together and
    watching Haramis make an even slower recovery than she had before. But when the
    Choosing came, Mikayla was dismayed to be chosen again.
    "That's twice in three years," she complained when she told Red-Eye. "You'd
    think the Goddess could spread it out a bit more-after all, there are five of
    us."
    "Did they say anything about a jubilee?" the bird asked anxiously.
    "Yes," Mikayla admitted. "There was some brief reference to it during the
    presentation to the congregation. You wouldn't believe how heavy that wretched
    headdress is-it's given me an awful headache. What's a jubilee?"
    "I'll tell you when I fetch you at the end of the month," Red-Eye said.
    "Fine," Mikayla said. "At least after the presentation to the Goddess tomorrow
    morning I don't have to wear the headdress again, and the ritual isn't until
    next year."
    Red-Eye fetched her at the end of her month of service. Instead of taking her
    back to the Tower, it took her to its cave on Mount Rotolo. But when it tried to
    explain the concept of the Goddess's Jubilee, she didn't believe it.
    "You're crazy, Red-Eye," she said. "They aren't going to kill me; I still owe
    them three more years of service after next year."
    "But that's what the Jubilee is," Red-Eye insisted. "Every two hundreds the
    Goddess needs a new heart to renew her life and rule for the next two hundreds.
    And it's the Youngest Daughter of the Goddess that they sacrifice."
    "If they haven't done it for two hundreds," Mikayla pointed out, "you can't
    possibly know about it."
    "But I do," it insisted. "The Priests of the Time of Darkness- the ones who made
    me-are the ones who perform the sacrifice. They are part of the priesthood of
    the Goddess Meret."
    "How could I have spent three years in Her Temple and never met them?" Mikayla
    asked skeptically.
    "You've spent three months there," the bird replied, "not three years, and
    you've spent it all shut up with the Temple virgins, which doesn't let you see
    much of what goes on in the Temple as a whole. The Priests of the Time of
    Darkness are nocturnal. Your rituals run from Dawn to the Second Hour of
    Darkness. The rest of the night is theirs. The only time they come out in the
    daytime is for the sacrifice."
    "If you say so," Mikayla said politely, privately thinking that the bird was
    paranoid about its creators, even if they did belong to the Temple. "I think
    you'd better take me back to the Tower, Red-Eye. Last I heard, Haramis wasn't
    well at all. I'm probably needed there."
    Haramis was indeed still very unwell, unable even to rise from her bed. Uzun
    spent all his time with her, and Fiolon left for Var shortly after Mikayla's
    return, saying that he had to see to things in Let.
    Mikayla spent most of the next year being bored and feeling useless, so when the
    time came for her to return to the Temple, she was ready to go. But to her
    amazement, Red-Eye flatly refused to take her.
    "I told you they'll kill you if you go there," it said, almost hysterically.
    "You can't go!"
    "I promised I would," Mikayla said. "If you won't take me, I'll just have to
    wait until morning and ask one of the other lammergeiers."
    "I'll tell your cousin," Red-Eye declared. "He'll stop you."
    "He's in Var," Mikayla pointed out. "And he knows that keeping my promises is
    important to me. He won't try to stop me."
    Chapter Twenty-Seven
    Haramis sat bolt upright in bed and stared at Uzun in horror. "Mikayla is doing
    what?"
    "She's going to be sacrificed to Meret," Uzun said wretchedly. "That was the
    bargain she made in exchange for my new body. But she didn't know what she was
    agreeing to," he added urgently. "We have to stop her!"
    "When and where is this taking place?" Haramis asked, feeling sick. I knew the
    girl was unhappy here, I knew she didn't like me, but I had no idea…
    "The day after tomorrow, at dawn," Uzun replied grimly. "At Meret's Temple on
    Mount Gidris."
    "Why Mikayla?" Haramis asked. Uzun sighed, and she said hastily, "I know you
    said it was in exchange for your body, but why would they want to sacrifice
    Mikayla, rather than someone else? What makes her special to them?"
    "She's a royal virgin," Uzun said bitterly. "I'll bet they were thrilled when
    she fell into their hands. I should never have complained about being a harp,"
    he added miserably.
    "She's hardly the only royal virgin in existence," Haramis pointed out. "Her
    youngest brother is probably still one-what is he now, sixteen? And Fiolon is
    royal and presumably still a virgin."
    "They're male," Uzun said. "Mikayla's the virgin daughter of a King."
    "So what?" Haramis said without thinking. "So am I." Then she realized what she
    had said, and repeated it with a different inflection. "So am I. If all they
    want is the virgin daughter of a king…" Her voice trailed off as she thought.
    "No, you could not take her place," Uzun snapped. "You don't look anything like
    Mikayla."
    "A simple glamour," Haramis said. "She and I are nearly the same size; all we'd
    have to do is change clothes."
    "Haramis," Uzun said through clenched wooden teeth. "You can't cast a simple
    glamour. You can't even talk to the lammergeiers anymore. You can't even scry!
    You have been ill, and you do not yet have your powers back."
    Haramis just looked at him, feeling the pieces of her life slip into a pattern.
    "I'm sorry, old friend," she said softly. "I can take her place, and I must. I
    owe it to her, and I owe it to the land. I have had," she continued
    dispassionately, "at least two major brainstorms in the last five years, and the
    Flower only knows"-her fingers went to the bit of Trillium embedded in amber in
    the Talisman about her neck-"how many minor ones. I haven't been able to talk to
    the lammergeiers since the first one, and with each successive attack, I lose
    more of my abilities. I have virtually no magic left, and my physical body is
    failing. Since it's over two hundreds old, that shouldn't be too surprising. And
    every time that I get sick, so does the land. Look what happened last time- the
    damage was so bad that Fiolon came running up here all the way from Var! If the
    inhabitants of Var are noticing our troubles, I am not doing my job."
    "Fiolon was the only one who noticed," Uzun said, "and he and Mikayla were able
    to fix the damage. Besides, that was the time before last, not last time.
    Nothing dreadful happened last time."
    "Mikayla ran away again." Haramis shot a sharp look at Uzun. "What do you mean
    'Fiolon was the only one who noticed'-why should he be the only one?"
    Uzun sighed. "Fiolon is the Archimage of Var."
    "What?" Haramis gaped at him. Whatever she had been ex-pecting to hear, she told
    herself, it wasn't this. "You mean that he's still linked with Mikayla, and-"
    "No." The reply was definite. "Oh, he's probably still linked with Mikayla-and
    thank the Flower for that, because that's the way we're getting most of our
    information; they still talk to each other every night."
    "How?" Haramis asked.
    "They found a pair of spheres in the old ruins on the Golobar right before you
    brought them here. The first time you sent Fiolon away, they discovered they
    could use them to scry each other-in fact, Mikayla uses hers to scry everything,
    unless you're watching her. When Mikayla's at the Temple and can't hide the
    sphere from the priests, she has her favorite lammergeier keep it for her, and
    then she and Fiolon both communicate through the bird."
    "So they've been in constant communication for the past five years?" Haramis
    asked. "Even when I sent Fiolon back to Var?"
    "Exactly," Uzun said. "You may remember that Mikayla made a bit of a fuss over
    that…"
    "She locked herself in her room for two days," Haramis said, remembering. "And
    she was awfully quiet for a long while after she came out."
    "She locked herself in her room and linked with Fiolon," Uzun said. "She told me
    about it later. It seems that she'd been sharing all of her lessons with him-and
    you had taught her quite a bit by then, probably more than you realize. You
    still held the power and the land sense for Ruwenda, but nobody did for Var, and
    the second Fiolon set foot on the ground there he got its land sense."
    "And Mikayla, of course, got the backlash." Haramis didn't need that part
    explained to her. "No wonder she suddenly got interested in what it meant to
    have land sense and be Archimage. I thought she was finally becoming resigned to
    her fate. But she was just gathering information for Fiolon, wasn't she?"
    "To her mind, yes," Uzun said. "But she's not stupid, and she couldn't pass on
    to him what she hadn't learned herself."
    "A male Archimage." Haramis shook her head in wonder. "Are you absolutely sure,
    Uzun?"
    "Yes," Uzun replied. "But if you doubt my perceptions, question him yourself."
    He crossed to the bellpull and gave it a savage tug.
    "Is he here, then?" Haramis asked. "I hadn't realized that we had guests."
    "He is here as my guest," Uzun said. "I don't know what you have against him,
    Haramis, other than the fact that he's male, but I like him."
    Enya arrived while Haramis was still trying to think of a reply to that. Uzun
    asked her to find Fiolon and send him to Haramis's room. Haramis didn't protest,
    but Enya did.
    "But, Master Uzun, he's probably back in that cave; that's where he was headed-"
    "So send one of the Vispi for him," Uzun snapped. "The Lady wants to see him,
    and surely you don't expect her to go down there after him!"
    "No, Master Uzun," Enya curtsied her way out of the room. "I'll have him fetched
    at once, Lady."
    Of course, when it involved sending someone below the Tower and along the tunnel
    to the ice cave, and then having the person you wanted make the return journey,
    "at once" was a long time. Uzun spent the time trying to convince Haramis that
    she couldn't possibly take Mikayla's place, but he wasn't making any headway
    when Fiolon joined them.
    "White Lady." Fiolon bowed formally to Haramis, then smiled at Uzun. "Master
    Uzun. How may I serve you?"
    Haramis studied the young man. He didn't look at all like the young men she had
    known when she was a girl. He had the ageless, serene quality of a great
    Adept-or of an Archimage. She tried to remember how old he would be by now.
    Let's see, he's the same age as Mikayla, which would make him-eighteen? Yes,
    eighteen. Uzun must be at least partially correct, she realized. This is
    definitely not your normal eighteen-year-old.
    "You can help me talk some sense into the Lady," Uzun snapped. "She has the
    crazy idea that she can take Mikayla's place!"
    Fiolon looked at Haramis for several minutes, and then looked sadly at the
    Oddling. "I'm sorry, Uzun," he said soberly, "but she's right. It is possible,
    and I fear that it would be best for the land."
    "The land!" Uzun practically screamed. "Is that all you Archimages care about?"
    "The land and its folk," Fiolon said gently. "I'm sorry, Uzun; I know you don't
    want to lose her. Neither do I. But I don't want to lose Mikayla, either."
    "Of course I don't want to lose Mikayla!" Uzun protested. "But it's my fault
    she's in this mess-I should be the one to be sacrificed in her place. Haramis
    can barely walk, and she certainly can't cast a glamour that will make them
    think she's Mikayla. Besides, Mikayla is descended from the royal family of
    Labornok; Haramis isn't."
    "The two lands have been joined since Princess Anigel married Prince Antar,"
    Fiolon reminded him. "You should remember that; you wrote half the ballads about
    it."
    "Are you saying that I'm Archimage of Labornok, as well as of Ruwenda?" Haramis
    asked curiously.
    Fiolon stared at her. "Aren't you?"
    Haramis shrugged. "I never thought of it."
    Fiolon frowned in concentration and began to pace the room. "That might explain
    why the cult of Meret still flourishes in Labornok," he said. "If you don't have
    the land sense for Labornok, maybe someone else does-or nobody does." He turned
    to look at her. "Lady, have you ever been in Labornok?"
    "No." Haramis shook her head. "This Tower is as close as I've ever been to the
    border, and we're well on the Ruwendan side here. Movis is about halfway down
    Mount Rotolo, and even the ice cave where I found my Talisman was on this side
    of Mount Gidris. So, no, I've never set foot in Labornok, or even flown over
    it."
    "That may be the problem then," Fiolon said. "But it's not our most urgent
    problem right now. Did Uzun tell you about the sacrifice?"
    "Just that it's to take place the day after tomorrow at dawn."
    Fiolon nodded. "I've been watching in the mirror. It's a very useful device;
    I've been able to map out the entire Temple by using it." He grinned briefly.
    "And I'm probably the only man alive, except for their priest-the one they call
    the Husband of the Goddess Meret-to have seen the rooms they keep the Temple
    virgins in. Since the mirror will show me any part of the Temple on request, I
    can use it to keep track of Mikayla when I'm here, instead of having to scry her
    personally or bespeak her lammergeier."
    He sighed. "But now the news is not good. She's to fast all day tomorrow and
    keep vigil alone in the outer cavern tomorrow night. I suspect that the purpose
    of that is to make her too weak to put up much of a struggle when she discovers
    what's going on, but while she's alone Red-Eye and I can go in, grab her, and
    get out without being seen."
    "Red-Eye?" Haramis asked.
    "It's a lammergeier," Fiolon explained.
    "Lammergeiers are diurnal," Haramis pointed out. "They sleep at night, and they
    can't see very well in the dark."
    "Red-Eye is an exception," Fiolon said. "It's an albino-totally white, with no
    pigment in his eyes."
    "Albinos have pink eyes," Haramis pointed out.
    "So does Red-Eye," Fiolon said; "it just refuses to admit it. It says that
    'Pink-Eye' is a ridiculous name. And it has been a good friend to Mikayla, so
    I'm willing to humor it in this. It has excellent night vision and it's nearly
    invisible against snow."
    "So you go in on this Red-Eye," Haramis said, "grab Mikayla, which should be
    easy enough for you-
    "No," Fiolon said. "It won't be easy. She's not going to come willingly. She
    says that she gave her word that she'd do this ritual, and she keeps her word."
    "What about her promise to be Archimage?" Haramis demanded crossly.
    Fiolon gave an odd crooked smile. "When did she ever promise that?"
    "When she came here, of course," Haramis said, and then thought about it. "I
    guess she never did actually promise to be Archimage."
    "You didn't ask for her promise," Fiolon pointed out. "I was there, remember.
    You told her she was to be Archimage after you, and when she asked if she was to
    be given a choice, you said no. You said that the matter was too important to be
    left to the whims of a child."
    Haramis sighed. "You're right, that is what I said. I should have spent less
    time talking and more time listening-I daresay Uzun knows her better than I do.
    Well, no matter now. Can Red-Eye carry me as well as you?"
    "Yes," Fiolon said. "But you don't absolutely have to take her place. I can just
    pull her out."
    "And have Labornok attack Ruwenda for the second time in as many hundreds,"
    Haramis said, "with magic, yet-and no one in Ruwenda properly trained to repel
    it."
    "I guess you have a point there," Fiolon said unhappily. "The priests of Meret
    are pretty ruthless, more than Mikayla realizes. I've seen them more than she
    has-and under different circumstances. They keep the Daughters of the Goddess
    very sheltered, so she doesn't see much when she's there, and I don't believe
    that she's ever watched them in the mirror since the first day she found them.
    "They know that Mikayla belongs here at the Tower," he continued. "They know
    she's supposed to be Archimage, so this is the first place they'd look for her.
    And she'd be no help fighting them off; in fact, I'd have to lock her up to keep
    her fiom summoning a lammergeier and going back to them."
    "But she can't go back to them if they're not there," Haramis said.
    "What do you mean?" Fiolon asked.
    "Mikayla doesn't know she's to be killed; is that right?" Haramis said.
    "Red-Eye tried to tell her, and I've tried to tell her," Fiolon said unhappily,
    "but she won't believe us. She says that she was chosen as the Youngest Daughter
    of the Goddess two years ago and survived just fine, thank you, and besides she
    owes them three more years of service after this one, so why should they kill
    her now? She doesn't understand that for the Jubilee Festival, it's different.
    They'll cut her heart out of her living body, to give the Goddess a fresh heart
    and another two hundreds of life."
    "Is that what they do, then," Haramis asked, "put her on the altar and cut out
    her heart?"
    "With their ritual black obsidian knife. And then they give her body to the
    river, which is the Goddess's blood," Fiolon said. "I observed a session where
    the priests were planning the ritual, choosing who was to officiate, and so
    forth. I got a lot of details from listening to that, and then I had the mirror
    show me the chamber where they do the sacrifice. The sacrificial altar is right
    over the point where the river comes out of the rock, on the west side of the
    Temple."
    "You've seen it then," Haramis said. "What is the altar made of?"
    "Living rock," Fiolon said. "That whole chapel is carved out of -oh, I see. Yes,
    it's definitely part of the land. It's not something artificial brought in. If
    you can use the land on the Labornoki side of the mountains, you can use the
    chapel, altar and all."
    "Use?" Uzun asked.
    "An Archimage draws power from contact with her land," Fiolon explained.
    He really does understand this, Haramis realized. Uzun must be correct, but it
    still doesn't feel right to have a male Archimage.
    "Actually," Fiolon continued, "an Archimage can use any land somewhat; I found
    when I was working with Mikayla that I could tap into Ruwenda just a little
    bit." He looked sideways at Haramis. "I would have asked your permission, Lady,
    but you were so sick then…" His voice trailed off.
    "The important thing is that the land be well," Haramis said. "Who heals it is
    not a major consideration." And I should have realized that years ago, she
    thought. "To get back to our current plan," she continued. "Tomorrow night,
    Fiolon, you and I will fly to where Mikayla is keeping vigil. Since we do not
    wish to spend the entire night in argument, I would suggest that we take along
    some means of rendering her swiftly and silently unconscious."
    Fiolon nodded. "There's a liquid in a bottle in the cellar that will do that,"
    he said. "It's one of the things Orogastus collected. But I have a great
    advantage over him," he said, smiling impishly and suddenly looking close to his
    actual age. "I can read the directions."
    "You can?" Haramis was startled. "How did you learn the language of the Vanished
    Ones?"
    "The mirror," Fiolon said. "Orogastus's 'magic mirror' is, among other things, a
    teaching device."
    "I knew it was a machine," Haramis said, remembering. "I realized that the first
    time I saw it. There Orogastus stood, invoking all sorts of nonexistent Dark
    Powers, and there was this old machine, barely in working order."
    Fiolon laughed. "Too bad Orogastus didn't realize that. He built this Tower
    right on top of the machine's power supply." He noticed Haramis's blank look and
    explained. "It's powered by sunlight, and there was a solar cell built on top of
    it to collect the sunlight and store it in batteries." Haramis wondered what
    "solar cell" and "batteries" were,- but didn't interrupt to ask. Judging from
    the context, they must be some sort of energy collection and storage devices.
    Fiolon continued. "Orogastus didn't know what that black flat surface was for,
    but it was there, and clear, so he put his Tower on it. And then he let snow
    cover what the building didn't, so the machine couldn't recharge the batteries
    effectively. This meant that he couldn't use it much. Mikayla found it when you
    were ill at the Citadel, and she figured out what and where a solar cell was,
    which was pretty intelligent of her-though she's always been good with
    mechanical things-and so we cleared the plaza, which exposed the solar cell, and
    then the mirror started working just fine. We used it to see how you were doing,
    and to learn the language of the Vanished Ones. That's how Mikayla found the
    Temple of Meret in the first place."
    "The mirror would have shown her where it was," Haramis remembered. "It showed
    my sisters' locations when Orogastus showed it to me."
    "Yes," Fiolon said. "She had it display human workers of magic until she found
    someone who could make Uzun a body. Then she left me here to keep Uzun company
    while she went there to learn the technique."
    "I should never have let her go!" Uzun burst out.
    "You couldn't have stopped her," Fiolon reminded him gently. "I don't think I
    could have at that point, either. She was so angry at life that she needed a
    battle she could fight. Finding you a proper body was her battle-her way of
    striking back at the fate that had stuck her here."
    "So you can render her unconscious," Haramis said, dragging the discussion back
    on track. "I can then change clothes with her, and you can bring her back here.
    Keeping her here long enough for the sacrifice to take place is your problem. As
    for me, the fact that Mikayla supposedly has been fasting and has spent all
    night sitting in the cold should account for any weakness or difficulty in
    walking on my part. But, Fiolon, as Uzun reminds me, I can't even manage a
    simple glamour anymore. Can you cast one on me before you leave me?"
    Fiolon nodded. "I can cast a glamour that will make you look like her as long as
    you are alive and your body is intact. But when they take out your heart, it's
    likely to collapse."
    "Good." Haramis smiled grimly. "I hope I'm still able to see their faces at that
    point. Try to tamper with my chosen successor, will they? I think not."
    "I'll put a pain-block spell on you, too," Fiolon said. "I should be able to
    link it with the land there, so it should hold unless you're floating in midair
    or something equally unlikely."
    "That should take care of things, then," Haramis said. "I'll rest until it's
    time to go-around midnight tomorrow, I should think. I'll have Enya bring me
    some soup and bread about two hours before that; there's no reason for me to
    fast. That should ensure that I have the strength to do what I must."
    "But, Haramis…" Uzun protested.
    "I'm sorry, Uzun," Haramis said firmly, "but I have to do this. Fiolon, you and
    Mikayla will take care of Uzun when I'm gone, won't you?"
    "Yes, Lady, of course we will"-Fiolon forced a smile-"when he's not taking care
    of us."
    "Good." Haramis sank back against her pillows, suddenly feeling very tired
    indeed. "I'd like to rest now."
    "Certainly, Lady." Fiolon bowed and left the room, pulling Uzun with him.
    Haramis heard the Oddling's voice as he was dragged down the hall. "Does she
    think I want to live with her gone?"
    My poor old friend, Haramis thought sleepily, what have I done to you? What have
    I done to all of us?
    Chapter Twenty-Eight
    Haramis spent the next day resting and eating. Shortly before she and Fiolon
    were due to leave, Enya came to her room with a long white robe, high-necked and
    long-sleeved. "Lord Fiolon told me to bring this to you, Lady," she said. "He
    says Mikayla left it in her room last time she was home."
    Haramis didn't recognize the garment. She guessed that it must be one Mikayla
    had worn home from the Temple of Meret. With any luck it would be identical to
    what she would be wearing now, and changing clothes with her might not have to
    involve stripping to bare skin on a cold mountainside. "Thank you, Enya," she
    said. "Help me to put it on, please."
    As Enya complied Haramis surveyed the little Nyssomu woman. It hardly seemed
    fair, after all her years of faithful service, to leave her without so much as a
    word. "Enya," she said, "I'm going out tonight."
    Enya sniffed. "Tell me something I don't know. Master Uzun's been moping about
    all day, talking about how you're going to Certain Death."
    Haramis smiled faintly. "Melodramatic, as always, but, I'm afraid, substantially
    correct. It is very probable that I won't be coming back alive."
    "Oh, Lady," Enya gasped. "And here I was thinking he was exaggerating, as he
    usually does."
    "Fiolon is going with me, and he should be bringing Mikayla back with him,"
    Haramis said. "When I die, one-or possibly both-of them should become Archimage
    of Ruwenda." She paused. "I think. Do you know, Enya, I suddenly find I'm not so
    certain of any of the things I used to be sure of."
    "Don't worry about it, Lady," Enya said briskly. "The land will take care of
    things. It always does, if you let it."
    "Yes," Haramis said. "I've finally decided to stop fighting it. I've made rather
    a mess of things, but I think it's not too late to set them right. At least I
    hope it's not." She took a deep breath. "I want to thank you, Enya, for your
    service to me. You have been a faithful servant and a good friend." She
    hesitated. "I don't know if you will wish to stay here with Mikayla or not. But
    whatever you choose, you have my blessing." She laid her hand on Enya's head and
    felt warmth briefly pulse through her fingers. I guess I haven't lost quite all
    my powers, she thought. I'm glad of that.
    She added boots, mittens, and a warm cloak to her outfit and went to find Uzun.
    He was moping in front of the fire in the study, where he had spent so many
    years as a harp. "Old friend," she began, and then her voice choked up on her.
    "Oh, Uzun," she said, tears streaming uncontrollably down her cheeks, "I'm going
    to miss you. And I most humbly ask your pardon for everything I ever did to hurt
    you."
    "You never hurt me, Princess," Uzun replied quickly. Haramis knew he lied, for
    she could recall numerous instances of her thoughtless or selfish behavior
    harming both Uzun and others around her. But Uzun would probably rather die than
    admit she wasn't perfect. "And don't worry about me." The wooden Oddling
    sniffed. He was actually crying, Haramis noticed. What an incredible piece of
    craft this body was. "I'll stay here long enough to compose a ballad about your
    bravery and sacrifice, and then I'll be along after you. Mikayla promised long
    ago to set me free when you were gone."
    Haramis hugged him. "Do whatever you think best," she said. "Fare well, oldest
    and dearest of my friends."
    "Fare well, Princess." Uzun turned back to the fire and buried his face in his
    hands.
    Haramis went slowly up the stairs to the balcony where the lammergeiers landed.
    Fiolon was already there, holding one of the special sleep sacks that Haramis
    used to send Nyssomu messengers to the lowlands. "I thought it might be best to
    put Mikayla in this for the trip home," he explained.
    "Good idea," Haramis agreed.
    "Yessss," a voice came out of the darkness above them. Haramis looked up in
    surprise. Fiolon was right, she realized. Against a white background, such as
    either snow or her Tower, the great bird was invisible, except for its eyes.
    "You're Red-Eye," she said. The bird dipped its head briefly in acknowledgment.
    "Thank you for your help in this matter," Haramis said.
    She couldn't hear the bird's reply herself, but Fiolon repeated it for her. "I'm
    glad to help," the bird had said. "Mikayla is a friend." It hopped down to the
    balcony floor and extended a wing. The gesture was as clear as the words "Let's
    go" could possibly have been.
    Fiolon helped Haramis climb onto the bird's back, then scrambled up behind her.
    The lammergeier beat his wings and lifted smoothly into the night sky.
    It seemed no time at all to Haramis before they were dropping toward the ground
    again. Then the great bird banked to the left and flew into an enormous cave.
    The pillars at the entrance, which Haramis thought at first were giant icicles,
    were more than far apart enough for Red-Eye to fly between. Just inside them
    Haramis saw a small figure seated cross-legged on a fur rug. Mikayla looked up
    at them. "Red-Eye, what are you doing here? I'm supposed to be keeping vigil
    alone!"
    Haramis couldn't hear what Red-Eye said to Mikayla, but she was willing to bet
    it was some version of "you cannot do this."
    "We've been through this before," Mikayla said with the weary patience of
    someone who had been through this many times before. "I gave my word."
    "But you didn't know what you were promising." Fiolon slid off the bird's back
    and extended a hand to help Haramis.
    "Nobody ever really knows what they're promising on the important things in
    life," Mikayla said impatiently. "My parents married a week after they met-do
    you think they knew what they were promising in their wedding vows?"
    "I think it certain that they knew more of what they were promising than you
    did," Haramis said, sliding down to stand on the fur rug. Her knees gave out
    almost at once, and she wound up kneeling, face-to-face with the girl she had
    tried to train as her successor. Fiolon faded back into the shadows and began
    slowly to edge around behind Mikayla.
    "Lady Haramis," Mikayla said in surprise. "You should be home in bed. Did Fiolon
    drag you all the way out here in the middle of the night to help him argue with
    me?"
    "No," Haramis said quietly. "I came to take your place."
    Mikayla stared at her incredulously. "You can't," she said. "This isn't your
    affair. You didn't promise anything."
    "Maybe not in words," Haramis said. "But when I took Uzun from his friends and
    isolated him in my Tower, I made myself responsible for the consequences. When I
    took you and Fiolon from your home and family, I took on responsibilities for
    both of you as well. I cannot allow you to lay down your life-especially at such
    a young age-to mend things I should not have done in the first place." Mikayla
    stared at her, too shocked by the Archimage's words to comment. Haramis went on.
    "I do not know if the land sense of Ruwenda will come to you when I die. I
    thought you were intended to be my successor, but"-she smiled sadly- "lately
    I've discovered I have been wrong about a number of things. If you are meant to
    be Archimage, it will come to you. If not"-she shrugged-"I don't know what will
    happen. My only hope is that, whatever happens, you will live and be happy."
    Fiolon, who by this time had moved behind Mikayla, suddenly leaned forward and
    held a cloth soaked in liquid over her mouth and nose. Mikayla struggled
    briefly, then went limp. Fiolon laid her body down gently and hastily stripped
    off all her clothes but the underrobe. As Haramis had suspected, it was
    identical to the one she wore.
    "Lady." Fiolon helped Haramis change her cloak, boots, and mittens for the ones
    Mikayla had been wearing.
    As he bent to pick up Mikayla's unconscious body, Haramis said, "Wait!"
    As Fiolon looked inquiringly at her Haramis pulled her Talisman, which she had
    worn constantly since the day she found it two hundreds ago, from around her
    neck. Slipping it over Mikayla's head, she said formally, "I give my Talisman,
    the Three-Winged Circle, to my kinswoman Mikayla." She sat back. "Fiolon, you
    can take her home now. Take good care of her for me."
    Fiolon lifted Mikayla's body, placed it carefully in the sleep sack, and
    fastened it to Red-Eye's body. Then he turned back to Haramis. "I'll set the
    spells now," he said. "First, the glamour."
    Haramis couldn't feel a thing, but the bird cocked its head appraisingly and
    nodded.
    "Thanks," Fiolon said briefly. Haramis wondered if the bird had made some
    comment to Fiolon that she was unable to hear. "Now, the pain-block," Fiolon
    continued. He took off his mittens, murmured a few words, too softly for Haramis
    to catch them, touched his hands together briefly over her head, and passed them
    down beside the sides of her body. He finished on his knees in front of her,
    placing his bare hands flat on the floor < on either side of the rug. "I think
    that's anchored to the land," he said. "How do you feel?"
    "Just fine," Haramis said. It was true. Every ache and sore joint she had had
    suddenly vanished. She had not felt this good in over a hundred. "Thank you,
    Fiolon. Go now, with my blessing." She placed her hand on his bowed head.
    "Thank you, Lady," Fiolon said. "I only hope that when my time comes I will be
    as brave and as wise as you."
    Haramis didn't know what to reply to that. She didn't think she was being
    particularly brave, and she certainly didn't feel wise. "Fare well, Fiolon," she
    said finally. "Now go, before someone sees you."
    Fiolon climbed on Red-Eye's back behind the sleep sack, and the bird inclined
    its head silently to Haramis before taking off through the columns and into the
    night sky. It vanished from sight at once.
    Haramis sat in Mikayla's place, keeping the vigil. For the remaining hours of
    darkness she sat there, quietly remembering her life: her parents and sisters,
    her teachers and friends-especially Uzun; the time when she was newly made
    Archimage and was still trying to figure out what it entailed; the finding of
    her Talisman…
    I found my Talisman on this same mountain peak, she thought, on the other side
    of it. She remembered how unstable the ice caves there had been. I wonder if the
    land on this side is unstable as well. She reached out with her mind, trying to
    touch the land around her. She thought she could sense the land a little bit,
    very faintly, and she thought that perhaps she sensed a flaw in it somewhere
    above where she was sitting. I think it's above the Temple, she realized. Good.
    I may be able to use that-assuming that this isn't all just wishful thinking on
    my part.
    They came for her just before dawn, four young maidens in light blue-gray robes,
    singing a hymn. They had to help her to her feet, for her body was stiff from
    sitting in one position for so many hours. There were also several young men,
    carrying the poles that supported an ornate chair-almost a throne, Haramis
    thought. One of the young men gave her the nastiest smile she had ever seen on a
    human face. In fact, she thought, I've seen Skritek with kinder expressions. I
    wonder what Mikayla did to this one. Surely nothing that would justify his
    gloating over her death like this.
    She ignored him; she ignored everyone. Since she didn't know who any of these
    people were, this seemed the safest course. It wouldn't do to have them discover
    that she was not Mikayla too soon. Fortunately, no one seemed to expect her to
    speak. Still singing, they carried her back into the Temple.
    At a curtained arch deep inside, the men with the chair! stopped, and the women
    led her across a carpet-covered floor into a bathing chamber. They bathed her,
    wove her hair in an intricate arrangement of braids, and anointed her skin all
    over with some sort of oil. Haramis noticed that the women were all careful to
    wash the oil off their hands when they were done. There must be some sort of
    drug in it, she thought. Something to make me more tractable, perhaps? Or maybe
    something to increase pain-this sort of sacrifice does get a good deal of its
    power from the pain and fear of the victim. I expect to be a sad disappointment
    to them.
    The women put a clean robe and a set of ornate golden armbands on her and led
    her outside again. There, the men waited with the chair to carry her to the
    other side of the Temple, where the sacrificial chamber was located.
    Haramis looked at the chamber with interest, paying no attention to the two
    priests, robed in black with their faces covered with masks, who were advancing
    to greet her. As Fiolon had told her, the chamber was carved from living rock. A
    crude statue of the Goddess seemed to grow out of the far wall, with a stone
    altar at the level of her waist, stained with old blood. A stream, which Haramis
    knew was the beginning of the River Noku, came out from under the altar and
    flowed freely through the room. It was bridged with a few planks of dark wood
    near the entrance to the chamber, but in front of the altar it was uncovered,
    and there was, Haramis noted, plenty of room to drop a body into it. The current
    was swift and the water was undoubtedly extremely cold.
    The priests spoke to her, but Haramis did not recognize the language they used
    and did not bother to attempt a reply. They exchanged quick glances, then
    reached up to help her down from the chair, being careful to grasp her by the
    armbands rather than touch her bare skin. Haramis wondered if they were simply
    being careful to avoid the oil or if it was forbidden to touch the sacrifice
    directly. Or maybe both, she thought. Then her bare foot touched the ground.
    Haramis gasped and her knees buckled under her. She barely felt one of the
    priests grasp her around the waist and hold her up. By the Flower, Fiolon was
    right, she realized as the land sense of Labornok flowed into her at full
    strength. I should have come here long ago. Has it been waiting for me all this
    time?
    "Princess." The priest spoke in an urgent undertone, muffled by the black mask
    he wore. "Pull yourself together! Do you wish to be a disgrace to the high honor
    to which you have been called?"
    Haramis looked at him blankly for a moment before the sense of his words sank
    in. Then she drew a deep breath and stiffened her knees. "I'm all right now,"
    she said softly. "You can let go of me."
    The priest released her waist, but both men kept a firm grip on her armbands as
    they led her to the altar and turned her to face the people. The entire
    population of the Temple seemed to be there, Haramis thought, and only a few of
    them looked sad for Mikayla. The predominant expression was that of a Skritek on
    the hunt. I don't think I'll mourn their deaths overmuch.
    "Behold the Chosen One," the priest intoned.
    "Hail!" the crowd replied.
    "Beloved Youngest Daughter of the Goddess," chanted the second priest.
    "Hail!"
    "Who gives her heart to her Mother."
    "Hail!"
    "Who gives her life for her Mother."
    "Hail!"
    "Who dies that her Mother might live."
    "Hail!"
    Haramis was helped onto the altar and positioned so that her feet were toward
    the back of it and she lay looking up at the Goddess's face-such as it was,
    Haramis thought. The carving was crude indeed, and the face was more a
    suggestion than a clear image. The main function of the statue of the Goddess
    seemed to be to hold up the ceiling of the chamber. Haramis could sense that
    almost the entire weight of the room ran through that section of the wall. The
    people were behind her now, so she could no longer see them, which was just fine
    with her.
    One priest had left her side, while the other still kept a restraining hand on
    her armband, but now the first priest came up to the right side of the altar,
    holding the obsidian dagger of which Fiolon had spoken. He must have gone back
    toward the entrance and crossed over the bridge, Haramis thought, followed by,
    It's strange how the mind dwells on trivialities in the face of approaching
    death.
    Something was obviously bothering the priests. The priest on her left still had
    a firm grip on Haramis's arm as if he expected her to try to struggle or attempt
    to flee. The priest on her right took hold of her armband with one hand and
    raised the dagger with the other, but held that position while the two of them
    exchanged what Haramis assumed were worried looks. It's a good thing for them
    that they're wearing masks, she thought, almost amused. Otherwise the
    congregation would be suspecting by now that something is very wrong indeed.
    "What's the matter with you?" the priest with the dagger hissed. "Don't you
    realize that you are about to die?"
    Haramis blinked at him. "Of course I do."
    "Then why aren't you afraid?" asked the other priest.
    "Why should I be?" Haramis countered. It is my time to die, and I die for the
    land. That is as it should be-why should I be afraid? Of course, she thought
    with some amusement, I'm much older than they realize; they think they have a
    terrified child. She thought of Mikayla in her place and repressed a shudder.
    I'm glad they don't have her.
    "What do we do now?" the priest on her right whispered.
    "Proceed with the sacrifice," the priest on her left replied. "What else can we
    do? Where is it written that the sacrifice must be frightened?"
    "But the energy isn't right!"
    "I know, but we can hardly explain that to the people-who are waiting for us to
    proceed," the man muttered behind his mask. He reached out with his left hand
    and pulled a slab of stone slightly larger than his hand out of the breast of
    the statue of the Goddess. He set the slab on the altar beside Haramis. Haramis
    could see now that there was a cavity in the statue. There was something small
    and shriveled up inside it, presumably the heart of the last sacrifice. "Go
    ahead," the priest whispered to the priest with the dagger. "The pain should
    make up for the lack of fear." He added warningly in a low tone, "It had
    better."
    That's what you think, Haramis thought. Bless you, Fiolon, I think we've managed
    to sabotage this sacrifice quite thoroughly.
    The priest slashed at her with the dagger, slitting her robe down the front to
    her waist. When he raised the dagger Haramis saw blood on the tip of it, but she
    didn't feel a thing. Both priests looked down at her calm face, and Haramis felt
    as if she could see their anxious expressions through their masks. She smiled
    serenely up at them. By now, both of them seemed to be feeling all the terror
    any vengeful Goddess could possibly wish.
    The man with the dagger gulped visibly as he slit open her chest, broke apart
    several ribs (Haramis could hear them snap) and cut her heart free. Haramis
    didn't feel any pain, although as she started to lose large quantities of blood
    she began to feel light-headed.
    But, as Fiolon had predicted, when her body was no longer intact, the glamour
    faded out. The pain-block, being powered by the living rock under her back,
    stayed in place. The priest on her left, who had turned away to remove the old
    heart from the statue, gasped in horror when he turned back in time to see
    Mikayla's face become that of an old woman. The priest who was holding her heart
    aloft to show the people that the sacrifice had been carried out looked down at
    her and nearly dropped the heart. "Holy Meret!" he whispered. "Who are you?"
    "What is your name?" the other priest demanded urgently.
    Does he really think I'm fool enough to tell them? Haramis wondered, feeling
    ironically amused. Without my name, they have no hope of salvaging this
    ritual-do they think I don't know that?
    "Your goddess is false," Haramis told him calmly, forcing herself to remain
    conscious for a few more seconds. "I am the land, and I never die." She reached
    out with her mind and tugged at the flaw she had perceived earlier. She felt it
    give, and knew her work was finished.
    She slipped easily out of her body then, and watched, hovering above it as her
    heart turned to dust and trickled through the fingers of the horrified priest.
    Her body also turned to dust, amd above it, the statue of the Goddess began to
    do likewise. Hararmis saw a bright light above her, and she rose toward it,
    passing through the stone ceiling collapsing on top of her as if it weren't
    there. She was flying through the sky 'toward the light, and the Lords of the
    Air, in the form of great lammergeiers, accompanied her. Her life was over, and
    the work that had been given to her was complete.
    Chapter Twenty-Nine
    Mikayla started to come to as they removed her from the sleep sack on the
    balcony. Red-Eye looked lown at her and looked at Fiolon. "I'll let you handle
    the explanations," it said, quickly taking flight.
    "Coward," Fiolon said softly. "It must have had some experience with Mika's
    temper." He bent and picked up Mikayla's limp body and carried her down to the
    study, where he put her on a sofa near the fire.
    Uzun hovered over her anxiously. "Is she all right?"
    "She'll be fine," Fiolon said. "In a few minutes she'll doubtless be wide-awake
    and yelling at us."
    "And the Lady?"
    "All was well with her when I left."
    Uzun bowed his head in silence.
    It took Mikayla only a few minutes to wake up completely and take in her
    surroundings. "Fiolon, you idiot! Take me back before they miss me!"
    "They won't miss you," Fiolon said. "Haramis took your place, remember?"
    "Right." Mikayla looked at him in disgust. "Haramis can really fool them into
    thinking she's the Youngest Daughter of the Goddess. She doesn't even know the
    rituals. And she hasn't been able to cast a glamour on herself since her last
    brainstorm-or was it the one before that?"
    "Two before that," Fiolon said. "I put the glamour on her." He added, for Uzun's
    benefit, "And a pain-block spell. She won't feel a thing-I tied that one into
    the land, and the altar is carved out of living rock. The glamour will probably
    go when they cut her heart out-
    "When they whatl" Mikayla practically screamed. "Oh, by the Flower, Fiolon; it's
    just symbolic! I did the ritual two years ago, and you will notice that I'm
    still alive and well."
    "This is a jubilee year," Fiolon said. "For a jubilee, it's not symbolic."
    Mikayla sat up abruptly. "We'll go down to the mirror and watch it," she
    snapped, "then you'll see!" She looked startled and pressed her hand to the
    front of her tunic, then started dragging at the chain around her neck. "What's
    this?" She pulled it over her head and held it in front of her, staring at the
    silver wand with its circle and three wings. "I've never seen it before."
    "It's the Three-Winged Circle," Uzun said in a mournful voice. "Haramis's
    Talisman, her part of the Great Scepter of Power."
    Mikayla frowned at it. "For some reason, it reminds me of the Queen's crown."
    "The Three-Headed Monster," Uzun said. "That was Anigel's part."
    "What happened to Kadiya's?" Mikayla asked curiously, twisting the Talisman back
    and forth on the emd of its chain.
    "She took it with her into the swamps, and no one has seen her or it since."
    "So we can't use this for the Scepter of Power," Mikayla said, diverted
    temporarily from her other concerns. "What is it good for and why do I have it?"
    Fiolon groaned. "You have it because Haramis gave it to you. It's true magic-not
    one of the toys of the Vanished Ones-so be careful with it. Uzun, can you teach
    her how to use it?"
    The Oddling shook his head. "No. I don't know how. Only Haramis ever used it,
    and I wasn't with her then."
    Mikayla stared at both of them in exasperation. "Do you mean to tell me that,
    after all the years Haramis spent teaching me things that anyone could figure
    out for herself, she suddenly dumped this on me without a word of warning and
    with no training in how to use it?" She frowned. "How powerful is it?"
    "You can kill people with it." Fiolon and Uzun spoke in chorus.
    "Ugh." Mikayla held it out carefully at arm's length. "In that case, I'm going
    to put it away. I'm not stupid enoiugh to do random experiments with things that
    can kill people.'" She stood up. "I'll be back in a few minutes," she said, "and
    then we can go watch the ritual at the Temple."
    As she left the room she heard Fiolon saying to Uzun, "You don't have to watch
    this."
    Uzun's reply drifted down the hall after her. "If I don't watch, how can I write
    a proper ballad about her heroism? No. I missed too much of her Quest; I'll
    watch this to the bitter end."
    Mikayla led the way to the cave with the mirror. "Mirror, View Princess Haramis
    of Ruwenda," she commanded.
    "Scanning," the mirror replied. Then it showed Haramis being helped out of the
    carrying chair by the two priests, showed her knees giving way, and the priests
    holding her up.
    "What's wrong with her?" Uzun gasped.
    Fiolon studied the picture carefully. "She's barefoot," he noted. "Mikayla, is
    this the first time you would have set foot to the ground since we left you?"
    "They'd use the chair to bring me from the miountain to the bathing room, and
    then from the bathing room to the main Temple. I don't know why she's out of the
    chair in this chamber; normally the Youngest Daughter never leaves her chair-all
    day."
    "What's the floor in the bathing room made of? Is it bare rock?"
    "Of course not," Mikayla said indignantly. "Juist because the Temple is hidden
    in a cave doesn't mean the whole thing is a cave. The bathing room has carpets
    on the floor."
    "So this would be the first time she actually touched the land of Labornok,"
    Fiolon persisted.
    "Hasn't she ever been there before?" Mikaylai asked. "She's been Archimage for
    nearly two hundreds!"
    "Mikayla, will you answer the question?"
    "You mean is this the first time she would have set bare foot to bare ground?
    Yes, probably it is. Why?"
    "She's all right, Uzun," Fiolon said reassuringly. "She's just getting the land
    sense for Labornok, which can only help."
    "Just getting it?" Mikayla said. "Now? What kind of Archimage ignores half her
    land? And why is she getting land sense for Labornok when she hasn't felt it for
    Ruwenda in years?"
    "Mikayla, will you please be quiet!" Fiolon snapped.
    Mikayla shut her mouth. This wasn't the way Fiolon usually spoke to her. What's
    wrong? she wondered. Why is he so angry?
    "She's back on her feet," Uzun commented, "walking bravely to her doom."
    He sounds like a ballad, all right, Mikayla thought. But "walking bravely to her
    doom" is ridiculous. She didn't, however, say anything aloud. She still didn't
    know why the ritual was being changed; normally they didn't spend much time in
    the chamber they were in. Maybe I should just be quiet. If I'm right, they'll
    see it soon enough, and they can go get Haramis, and I can give her Talisman
    back to her. If I'm wrong … She shuddered. I hope I'm not wrong.
    As the ritual continued it became only too clear that Mikayla was wrong and that
    everyone who had tried to warn her had been right. Mikayla watched in horror and
    disbelief as the priest cut Haramis's heart from her body. How can she look so
    calm while they're doing that? Then the heart was a handful of dust, slipping
    through the priest's fingers, the body turned to dust, and the entire room began
    dissolving. The roof fell in with a resounding crash, and the echoes
    reverberated throughout the mountain. The last thing they saw before the mirror
    went dark was a great wall of snow crashing toward them.
    Mikayla collapsed to the floor, hands over her face. Dimly she heard the mirror
    say, "Subject no longer exists. No living people in that location."
    Then she felt it. It started with the feeling that she was sinking into the rock
    beneath her, becoming a part of Mount Brom. Then Mount Gidris became part of her
    body as well. She felt the avalanche on the north face, and broke it up into
    smaller pieces so that it would do a minimum of damage. Then she felt Mount
    Rotolo, with its hot springs and hidden valleys. Briefly she was aware of
    Red-Eye, sleeping in its cave. From the mountain chain her awareness expanded in
    both directions, north along the River Noku and across Labornok to the Northern
    Sea, and south along the River Nothar, across the Thorny Hell, the Dylex, the
    Goldenmire, past the Citadel and the Great Causeway, the Blackmire and the
    Greenmire, past Lake Wum and the Tass Falls, along the Great Mutar River to the
    border of Var, where an image of Fiolon stood guard.
    "Fio?" she said aloud.
    "I'm right here, Mika." Strong arms picked her up and carried her out of the
    cave. Behind her she heard the sound of the door sliding closed, followed by
    Uzun's wooden footsteps, but she could also hear rivers rushing to their
    respective seas and insects chirping in the Mires.
    Fiolon set her down briefly at the entrance to the cave so that he and Uzun
    could both lean on the great door to close it. Then he picked her up again.
    Mikayla considered protesting, saying that she could walk, but the jumble of
    images in her mind overrode anything else.
    If Haramis felt like this, no wonder the priests had to hold her up, she
    thought. This is much worse than it was when Fiolon got the land sense for Var.
    Of course, it is at least twice as much territory and I'm getting it
    firsthand-at least I think I am… "Fio? Can you sense the land?"
    His reply cut briefly through the babble in her head. "Just Var. Are you getting
    Ruwenda?"
    "Yes, and Labornok."
    "Don't bother trying to talk," Fiolon advised her. "Just relax and let it sort
    itself out."
    Sort itself out? Oh, I hope it will! She lay limp in his arms as he carried her
    into the kitchen, propped her on a stool by the fire, and asked Uzun to hold
    her. She was barely aware that he and Uzun had switched places until she saw
    Fiolon's face in front of her, holding a mug. "Drink this." He helped her to
    hold it steady, until she had drunk it all. It was hot adop soup and it made her
    feel a bit more like Mikayla and a bit less like every inch of ground in two
    kingdoms.
    "Better?" he asked. She nodded carefully. Her body still didn't seem to be quite
    all hers.
    "Good. Now eat this." He handed her a strip of dried meat. She chewed it with
    considerable effort, but by the time she was done, she was herself again. All
    the clutter in her mind was gone; in fact, when she tried carefully to reach for
    it, it wasn't there.
    "Fio," she said in horror, "I've lost the land sense."
    "No, you haven't," he quickly reassured her. "It's just turned off for a bit.
    Hot food and meat will do that. Getting the land sense for two kingdoms at once
    would be a lot for anyone to handle, especially someone who's been fasting for
    over a day and has just seen her kinswoman die."
    "Haramis." Mikayla shook her head, wishing she could deny what she had seen.
    "Uzun." She turned her head to look up at the Oddling. "I am so sorry."
    "No, Lady," Uzun said. "It was my fault. I should never have asked for a new
    body."
    "Considering that it was Haramis who turned you into a harp so that you needed a
    new body so that you could take care of her when she was ill," Fiolon remarked,
    "it seems to me that the blame could be spread all around. Besides, it's
    pointless. Done is done, and it wasn't really anyone's fault."
    "And Haramis had lost her magic," Mikayla pointed out. "It wasn't coming back,
    was it?"
    Uzun sighed. "I don't think so; and at the end, neither did she. I think that's
    part of why she insisted on doing this."
    "Did she mean to destroy the Temple the way she did?" Mikayla asked.
    "I think so," Fiolon said. "When we were planning this, she said something about
    your not being able to go back there if it wasn't there. I asked her what she
    meant, but then the discussion got sidetracked and she never did answer me." He
    paused. "But I think she did intend to destroy it; you know how she felt about
    blood sacrifice-especially unwilling sacrifice. That's what really ruined their
    ritual, you know," he said thoughtfully. "They wanted an unwilling sacrifice,
    young, terrified, and in pain. What they got was an Adept who was ready and
    willing to die."
    "That would change the energy involved quite a bit," Mikayla admitted.
    "Remember those priests," Uzun said. "They were more afraid than she was! This
    is going to make a great ballad." His face suddenly quivered and he started to
    cry. "Excuse me," he sobbed as he hurried from the room and clattered up the
    stairs.
    Mikayla stood up a bit unsteadily and stretched. "I think I can walk as far as
    my room now, Fiolon. All I want to do at the moment is to sleep for a week. I
    feel so numb and empty I don't think I could do anything else if I tried."
    "Sleep is probably the best thing for you," Fiolon said. "It's much easier to
    absorb land sense if you're not trying to do anything else at the same time."
    "I believe that," Mikayla said fervently. Then she thought of something else.
    "Fiolon, on the chance that Haramis didn't deliberately destroy the Temple, I
    think that when either of us dies, we should be sure to do it outdoors. Binah
    and Haramis were rather hard on buildings."
    Fiolon chuckled. "You may have a point," he agreed. He had to carry her to her
    room; she fell asleep before they reached her door.
    A few weeks later Uzun sang his ballad for them. It was a stirring epic, full of
    praise for Haramis's wisdom and bravery, Fiolon's cleverness, Mikayla's loyal
    friendship, and Red-Eye's flying skills. When he had finished it, Uzun looked at
    them uneasily. "What do you think?"
    Mikayla, blinking away her tears, said, "It's beautiful, Uzun. Haramis would
    have loved it."
    "You'll have to teach it to me," Fiolon said. "Some of that chording is truly
    original."
    Uzun hesitated. "I'll sing it for the mirror," he said, "and it can teach it to
    you."
    "That's a good idea," Mikayla said. "That way the mirror will always have it,
    just the way you sang it, even hundreds after you're gone."
    "Speaking of going," Uzun said, "do you remember what you promised me, Mikayla,
    the day you found the spell Haramis used to put me into the harp?" He looked at
    the harp, which he had been using to accompany himself.
    No! a voice inside Mikayla's head protested. I don't want to lose him, too! But
    she reminded herself sternly that she had resolved not to be selfish, as Haramis
    had been, with the lives of those around her. "Yes," she said, as steadily as
    she could. "I remember. I promised to release you when you asked." She gulped.
    "Are you asking now?"
    Uzun nodded. "Tomorrow before dawn would be best, I think. That will give me
    time to teach my ballad to the mirror."
    Mikayla bowed her head to hide her tears. "Tomorrow, then."
    "Thank you," Uzun said quietly. "Good night."
    After he left the room, Fiolon turned to Mikayla. "Did he just ask you to kill
    him?"
    "In a way," Mikayla said. "Technically I suppose he's been dead since Haramis
    put him into the harp. But he wanted my word that I'd release him when she was
    gone."
    "Do you really have to do this?" Fiolon protested. "I'll miss him."
    Mikayla's eyes filled with tears. "I'll miss him, too," she said. "But, yes, I
    do have to do this. I promised. I gave him my word."
    Fiolon sighed. "In that case, I'll help you. What do we have to do?"
    The next morning at dawn, Mikayla and Fiolon stood on the stone roof of the
    tower. They had burned Uzun's wooden body in a bonfire on the roof, and the fire
    had just finished burning out. They stood on either side of the ashes that
    remained, facing the rising sun. As the dawn wind came up it swept the ashes
    from the roof, scattering them in the air.
    Mikayla held a small box of bone dust, all that was left of Uzun's original
    skull. She poured half of the contents into her hand, then handed the box to
    Fiolon, who poured the rest into his hand. Together they lifted their hands and
    blew gently, sending the bone dust into the morning wind, streaming toward the
    sun.
    "Now he is one with the Lords of the Air," Mikayla said softly.
    Together they went down to the study, where Fiolon took up the harp and played
    an old song, the first of Master Uzun's compositions that he had learned. "It
    seems strange to think that this is just a harp now," he said. "I suppose it
    will always seem a little bit like Uzun to me."
    "Then we'll always have a little bit of him with us," Mikayla said. Assuming
    that there is an us. She forced herself to ask the question she had been
    dreading to have answered. "What will you do now, Fiolon? Will you have to
    return to Var?"
    "I'll have to go there from time to time," Fiolon replied, "just as you'll have
    to travel about your lands. But I thought, if you have no objection, that we
    could make this our primary home. We'll have to get more books, of course," he
    added teasingly, "by now even I've read everything in the library."
    Mikayla laughed in relief. He wasn't going to leave her; she wasn't going to
    have to be alone the way Haramis had been. "I have, too," she agreed. "Years
    ago. So we'll get more books. What else do we need?"
    "Children," Fiolon replied. "I know it's early to think of that, but in five or
    ten years you should be old enough to bear children -if you don't dislike the
    idea?"
    Mikayla shook her head. "I think I'd like to have children of my own, when the
    time is right. Of our own, I mean," she hastily added.
    "We can raise our children with a knowledge of magic and respect for the land,
    and have enough of them that the land will have plenty of choices for our
    successors."
    "Does this mean that Haramis was mistaken when she said magicians have to be
    celibate?" Mikayla asked.
    "Only if they make magic their entire life, if they're seeking Ultimate Power,"
    Fiolon intoned solemnly. "If magic is just a tool we use in our work, we have
    only to stay reasonably healthy." He grinned. "And with two of us, we can help
    each other out. We've always been a good team." He grew serious again. "Mikayla,
    I've loved you since we were seven years old, and we're of age now and don't
    need anyone's permission. Will you marry me?"
    Mikayla flung both arms around him and hugged him tight. "With all my heart,"
    she replied.
