SYNOPSIS OF VOLUME I 
THE MANY-COLORED LAND 
THE GREAT INTERVENTION OF 2013 OPENED HUMANITY'S WAY to the stars, giving the people of Earth 
unlimited lebensraum, 
energy sufficiency, and membership in a benevolent civiliza-tion, 
the Galactic Milieu. Humanity became the sixth of the 
Coadunate Races, a commonwealth of planet colonizers who 
shared high technology and the capability of performing mental 
operations known as metafunctions. The latter—which include 
telepathy, psychokinesis, and many other powers—had lurked 
in the human gene pool from time immemorial, but only rarely 
were manifest. 
By 2110, when the action of the first volume in this saga 
began, a kind of Golden Age prevailed. More than 700 fresh 
planets had been colonized by exuberant Earthlings. Humans 
with overt metapsychic powers were slowly increasing in num-ber; 
however, in the majority of the population, the mind-powers 
were either meager to the point of nullity, or else 
latent—that is, nearly unusable, because of psychological bar-riers 
or other factors. 
Even Golden Ages have their misfits, and the psychosocial 
structure of the Galactic Milieu had its share. A French physicist 
named Theo Guderian unwittingly provided these square pegs 
with a unique escape hatch when he discovered an apparently 
useless phenomenon: a one-way, fixed-focus time-warp open-ing 
into France's Rhone River Valley as it existed during the.Pliocene Epoch, six million years ago. 
Certain that a prehistoric 
Eden must exist on Pliocene Earth, an increasing number of 
misfits prevailed upon Guderian's widow, Angelique, to let 
them pass through the time-portal into "Exile." 
From her husband's death in 2041 until 2106, the rejuven-ated 
Madame Guderian operated a peculiar establishment that 
the Galactic authorities reluctantly tolerated. Her French inn, 
l'Auberge du Portail, served as a front for transporting clients 
from Old Earth to a world six million years younger. After 
suffering qualms of conscience about the fate of the transpor-tees, 
Madame herself ultimately passed through the one-way 
gate into Pliocene Exile. Operation of the time-warp was taken 
over by the Galactic Milieu, which had found it to be a con-venient 
glory hole for dissidents. 
On 25 August 2110, eight persons, making up that week's 
"Group Green," were transported to the Pliocene: Richard 
Voorhees, a grounded starship captain; Felice Landry, a dis-turbed 
young athlete whose violent temperament and latent 
mind-powers had made her an outcast; Claude Majewski, a 
133-year-old paleontologist recently bereaved of his wife and 
colleague; Sister Amerie Roccaro, a physician and burnt-out 
priest who longed to become a hermit; Bryan Grenfell, an 
anthropologist in search of his lover, Mercy Lamballe, who 
had preceded him through the gate two months before; Eliza-beth 
Orme, a Grand Master metapsychic operator deprived of 
her stupendous mental powers by a brain trauma; Stein Oleson, 
a misfit planet-crust driller, who dreamt of leading a Viking's 
life in a simpler world; and Aiken Drum, an engaging young crook who, like Felice, possessed 
latent metapsychic powers. 
These eight people successfully made the jump six million 
years into Earth's past—only to discover, as other time-travelers 
had before them, that Pliocene Europe was under the 
control of a group of maverick humanoids from another galaxy. 
The exotics were also exiled, driven from their home because 
of their barbarous battle-religion. The dominant exotic faction, the Tanu, were tall and hand

some. In spite of a thousand-year sojourn, there were still less 
than 20,000 of them on Earth because their reproduction was 
inhibited by solar radiation. Since their plasm was compatible 
with that of humanity, they had for nearly seventy years utilized 
the time-travelers in breeding, holding Pliocene humanity in 
benevolent serfdom. Antagonistic to the Tanu and outnumbering them by at least.four to one were 
their ancient foes, the Firvulag. These exotics 
were mostly of short stature and reproduced quite well on Earth. 
Tanu and Firvulag actually constitute a dimorphic race—the 
tall ones metapsychically latent, the short ones possessed of 
limited operant metafunctions. The Tanu wear mind-amplifiers, 
collars called golden tores, to bring their powers up to operancy. 
Firvulag do not require tores, and most of them are weaker in 
mental power than the Tanu. 
For most of the thousand years that Tanu and Firvulag re-sided 
on Pliocene Earth (which they called the Many-Colored 
Land), they were fairly evenly matched in the ritual wars fought 
as part of their battle-religion. The greater finesse and more 
sophisticated technology of the Tanu tended to counterbalance 
the superior numbers of the cruder Firvulag. But the advent of 
time-traveling humanity tipped the scales in favor of the tall 
exotics. Not only did Tanu-human hybrids turn out to have 
unusual physical and mental strength, but humans also en-hanced 
the rather decadent science establishment of the Tanu 
by injecting the expertise of the Galactic Milieu. The seventy 
years of time-traveling had seen nearly 100,000 humans trans-ported 
to Pliocene Europe; their assimilation gave the Tanu 
almost complete ascendency over the Firvulag foe (who never 
mated with humanity and generally despised them). 
The lot of humankind under the Tanu overlords is by no 
means grim; people who cooperate are treated very well. All 
rough work is done by ramapithecines, small apes who wear 
simple tores that compel obedience. (Ironically, these "ramas" 
are part of the direct hominid line that climaxed in Homo 
sapiens six million years later.) Humans occupying positions 
of trust or engaged in vital occupations under the Tanu usually 
wear gray tores. These do not amplify the mind, but do allow 
telepathic communication between humans and exotics; the de-vices 
also incorporate pleasure-pain circuits, through which the 
Tanu reward or punish their minions. The tores are not easily 
made, requiring a rare barium component in their manufacture, 
and so they are not used on the majority of "normal" (that is, 
metaphysically nonlatent) humans, who are coerced into obe-dience 
by other means. If Tanu testing shows that an arriving 
time-traveler has significant latent metafunctions, the lucky 
person is given a silver torc. This is a genuine amplifier similar 
to the gold collars worn by the Tanu—but with control circuits. 
Silver-torc humans enjoy a privileged position; rarely, they may.even be granted golden torcs and 
full freedom as citizens of 
the Many-Colored Land. 
The eight members of Group Green, like all new arrivals, 
were taken for mind-testing to a Tanu fortress, Castle Gateway. 
Almost at once, the Group proved to be anything but typical. The starship captain, Richard, 
temporarily escaped and had a 
terrifying encounter with a Tanu slave-mistress, Epone, who 
administered the tests for latent metafunctions. 
Elizabeth, the former farsensor and metapsychic teacher, 
discovered that passage through the time-warp had triggered 
restoration of the awesome mental powers she feared had been 
lost forever. Her discovery was noted with excitement by an-other 
Tanu, Creyn, who promised Elizabeth that a "wonderful 

life" lay ahead of her in the Many-Colored Land. 
Stein Oleson, the huge driller, was driven temporarily insane 
by the trip back through time. Smashing the door of his de-tention 
cell, he was subdued only after killing a number of 
gray-torc bondsmen. To insure Stein's future docility, he was 
fitted with a gray torc of his own. His heroic physique made 
him a candidate for the Tanu-Firvulag ritual war, the Grand 
Combat. Still unconscious from his recapture, he was readied 
for a trip south to the Tanu capital city of Muriah. 
Also torced—but with silver—was the trickster youth, Aiken 
Drum. The exotic testers had detected strong metapsychic la-tencies 
in him, which would be brought up to the operant level 
as he became accustomed to wearing the amplifier. 
The anthropologist, Bryan Grenfell, possessed no signifi-cant 
mental latencies. But his professional talents seemed 
strangely valuable to the Tanu, with the result that Bryan was 
able to bargain his cooperation in return for Tanu help in finding 
Mercy—and a torc-less status. 
The old bone digger, Claude Majewski, showed no hidden mind-powers. With some disdain, minions of 
the Tanu in-formed 
him that he would be sent north to the city of Finiah, 
together with most of the week's bag of time-travelers, and put 
to work. He found himself incarcerated in Castle Gateway's 
"people pen," together with more than thirty other ordinary 
humans, awaiting the departure of the northern caravan. In the 
prison dormitory lay Richard, comatose from mental abuse by 
Epone. 
The last members of Group Green to be tested by the exotic 
slave-mistress were Sister Amerie and Felice Landry. The nun 
had no important latencies. Faced with being tested next, Felice.seemed seized by hysterical fear; 
her agitation made an accurate calibration impossible. Epone gave up on the girl, since she could 
be tested later in Finiah. Then, in an offhanded way, 
Epone informed the two of the Tanu custom of using human 
women for brood stock, dismissing their indignant protests with 
the promise that they would eventually accept the role and even 
be happy with their new life in Finiah. When the exotic woman 
left them, Felice's feigned hysteria vanished. She had suc-ceeded 
in concealing her strong latent metafunctions from Epone, 
escaping the torc at least temporarily; and now she resolved in 
cold fury to "take" the entire Tanu race. 
That evening, two caravans left Castle Gateway, traveling 
along the Pliocene River Rhone in opposite directions. In the 
northern group, bound for Finiah on the Proto-Rhine at the 
edge of the Black Forest, were the partially recovered Richard, 
Claude, Amerie, Felice, and the majority of the other human 
prisoners. They were escorted by Epone and a squad of gray-torc 
human troops. In the southern cavalcade, led by Creyn, 
were Elizabeth, Bryan, Aiken Drum, the wounded Stein, and 
two other silver-torc humans: a former juvenile officer from a 
colonial satellite, Sukey Davies, and a glum Finno-Canadian 
forester, Raimo Hakkinen. 
At first the northern train made peaceful progress. Suffering 
from having to ride a huge Pliocene mount called a chaliko, 
Amerie searched her soul and began to understand the neurotic 
pressures that had led her to abandon her ministry. Richard, 
recuperating with the help of Claude, stewed in helpless rage 
when his position became clear. He was dubious, but subcon-sciously 
receptive, when Felice proposed a scheme for escape. 
Two days out of Castle Gateway, Felice's plan was acti-vated. 
She had three weapons: preternatural strength in a de-ceptively 
slight body, the ability to mind-control animals (an 

aspect of her metapsychic latency she had used during her 
athletic career), and a small knife that had escaped detection. 
Felice broke the chains holding her Group Green friends and 
those of four other prisoners. Then Richard, disguised in Amer-ie's 
religious robes, was able to stab the officer of the guard 
to death. Meanwhile, Felice mentally coerced the caravan's 
ferocious bear-dog escort, forcing the animals to attack the 
other soldiers and Epone. A wild fracas ensued, in which the 
freed prisoners, together with the mind-controlled bear-dogs, 
killed not only the rest of the soldiers, but the Tanu Epone as 
well..In the moment of triumph, Felice sought to take Epone's 
golden torc, knowing it would release the latent metafunctions 
heretofore imprisoned within her brain. But a half-crazed time-traveler 
threw the device into a lake, where it sank in deep water. 
Felice was prevented from murdering the interfering man only 
when Amerie administered a powerful sedative from her medical 
kit, causing the little athlete to fall unconscious. 
Bewildered and frightened, the ex-prisoners realized that 
telepathic news of the attack must have been flashed by the 
dying Epone. Most of the escapees elected to follow the moun-tainclimbing 
Oxford don, Basil Wimborne, who proposed to 
lead them in small boats across the prehistoric Lac de Bresse 
to safety in the high Jura. Claude, wilderness-wise from ex-peditions 
on wild planets of the Galactic Milieu, demurred. He 
advised taking to the forests of the adjacent Vosges Mountains, 
where it would be difficult for gray-torcs on chalikoback to 
pursue them. Only Richard and Amerie agreed to follow him, 
taking the still-unconscious Felice along. 
From a high ridge, the four members of Group Green saw 
gray-torc boats in pursuit of their former companions. That 
evening, Amerie felt herself strangely attracted by Felice's 
violent behavior, which seemed to reflect some dark shadow 
within her own conventional spirituality. 
While crossing a torrent on the following day, Amerie fell 
and broke her arm. The others made camp and tried to decide 
what to do. Felice seemed to take for granted that they would 
all lead a guerilla existence, harassing other caravans in the 
hope of getting another golden torc. Richard received this no-tion 
with scorn. The only sensible thing was to make for the 
sea, away from the regions that the Tanu were known to inhabit. 
Claude, knowing that Richard was right, but troubled at leaving 
the impetuous girl behind on her own, went off into the quiet 
woods to think. After burying his late wife's ashes, he fell 
asleep, waking at evening to find that a tiny Pliocene cat with 
illusions of domesticity insisted upon accompanying him back 
to camp. The cat, Claude felt, would be a valuable distraction 
for Amerie, who was becoming morbidly preoccupied with 
Felice. 
Man and pet returned to camp to find that all trace of the 
others had vanished. Fearfully, Claude went up the riverside 
path. The time-travelers had been warned of the terrible Fir-vulag 
who inhabited the Vosges forest. Now it seemed that 
Richard, Felice, and Amerie must have been abducted by the.shape-shifting little exotics—or else 
recaptured by minions of 
the Tanu. Hearing voices, then compelled against his will to 
reveal himself, Claude came upon the very desperados who 
had seized his friends. They were not exotics but human beings— 
free humans who had escaped from exotic bondage and now 
lived an outlaw life. 
Their leader was a well-rejuvenated old woman wearing 
a golden torc; the widow of the time-gate's discoverer and 

the ultimate author of Pliocene humanity's degradation... 
Angelique Guderian. 
On the last day of August, the four members of Group 
Green, Madame Guderian and her band, and some 200 other 
"Lowlives" (as the free humans proudly styled themselves) 
came to a hiding place in a giant hollow tree deep in the Vosges 
Mountains. The forest now swarmed with Tanu and their gray-torc 
henchmen, sent by Lord Velteyn of Finiah to search out 
the killers of his sister, Epone. Velteyn himself, proficient in 
the metafaculties of psychokinesis and creativity, was con-ducting 
personal sorties as the head of his Flying Hunt, a cadre 
of glorious Tanu knights in glass armor, made levitant by their 
lord's mental power. 
Safe in their sanctuary, the Lowlives and Green Group en-gaged 
in mutual assessment. Madame told the newcomers of 
her grandiose plan to free all of Pliocene humanity from Tanu 
bondage, a task she had undertaken in expiation of her own 
guilt. She had engineered a fragile alliance between Lowlives 
and Firvulag against the common Tanu enemy; but the entente 
had been only minimally productive. 
The Tanu were oddly invulnerable to the vitredur glass and 
bronze weapons commonly used by all three races. Tanu might 
suffer injury, but after a recuperative course administered by 
redactors—metapsychic healers—even the worst wounds would 
be cured. Madame and her chief fighter, a Native American 
named Peopeo Moxmox Burke who had once been a judge, 
were keenly interested in how Group Green had managed to 
dispatch Epone. Until this time, no Lowlife had ever been able 
to kill a Tanu. Felice displayed her little steel knife, and a fact 
that Amerie had already suspected became confirmed: Iron was 
poisonous to the Tanu, perhaps acting in some way to destroy 
the linkage between the exotic brain and the golden torc. (Felice 
looked upon Madame's own golden torc with some speculation 
at this point, but the intrepid old woman simply pricked herself.with the blade to show that 
humans were made of tougher 
stuff). 
At this point, a personage named Fitharn Pegleg arrived 
within the hollow tree. Resembling a short, sturdy human, 
he proved to be a Firvulag capable of assuming a monstrous 
shape, one of the Little People who had originally befriended 
Madame Guderian in the Pliocene. As she explained her plan 
to liberate enslaved humanity, Madame asked Fitharn to recite 
an ancient lay traditional among his people. It told of the 
original arrival of Tanu and Firvulag on Earth in a gigantic 
living spaceship that had as its spouse Brede, a woman from 
the exotic galaxy. In making the incredible journey across 
millions of light-years, the Ship was fatally strained. Tanu, 
Firvulag, and Brede escaped from the hulk in small flyers 
and watched the remains of the huge organism crash upon 
Pliocene Europe, forming a crater "too wide to see across." 
To consecrate the Ship's Grave, a ritual battle was fought 
by two heroes—Sharn of the Firvulag and Lugonn of the 
Tanu—the former armed with a photonic weapon called the 
Sword, the latter using a similar laser-type projector called 
the Spear. Sharn was defeated. The victor, Lugonn the Shining 
One, had the honor of receiving a blast from his own Spear 
between his eyes. Laid out in his golden glass armor, Spear 
at his side, Lugonn was left at the Ship's Grave to "captain 
it upon its final flight." 
After a thousand years had passed, the remote location of 
the Ship's Grave had faded from the memory of Tanu and 

Firvulag alike. But the legend had sparked hope in Madame Guderian. The Sword of Sharn was now in 
Tanu hands, 
serving as a trophy awarded to the winner of the annual Grand 
Combat religious war. But the Spear of Lugonn must still be 
there beside the crater lake, together with the gravo-magneti-cally 
powerful flying machines that had carried the exotics from 
their dying Ship. If the Lowlives could secure the photon weapon 
or a flying machine—or both—they would gain an unprece-dented 
advantage over the metapsychic barbarians who con-stituted 
the Tanu chivalry. 
Lowlives and friendly Firvulag had searched in vain for the 
Ship's Grave. But now Claude, knowledgeable in future ge-ology, 
told them where it must be. Only one astrobleme in 
Europe fit the description, a crater called the Ries that lay some 
300 kilometers to the east, on the northern shore of the Danube 
River..Jubilation greeted this intelligence, and it was decided to 
mount an expedition at once. With luck, the searchers might 
return before the end of the month. Then Firvulag would join 
Lowlife humanity in an attack against Finiah—provided that 
the fighting took place before the start of the Grand Combat Truce beginning at dawn on October 
first. The expedition would 
consist of Fitharn, Madame Guderian, Chief Burke, a dynamic-field 
engineer named Martha, a former gravomag repair tech-nician 
named Stefanko, and three members of Group Green. 
Claude would guide them to the spot. Richard (over his protests) 
would pilot a flyer if one could be made operational. Felice 
insisted she would be useful fending off wild beasts with her 
special talent, as well as doing chores such as hunting for food. 
(She had to go; around the neck of Lugonn's skeleton was a 
golden torc.) 
Fitharn proposed that the expedition receive official sanction 
from the Firvulag monarch, Yeochee IV. Before leaving the tree, Madame gave secret orders to a 
Lowlife metalsmith, Khalid 
Khan, to take a group of men to a site designated by Claude, 
where iron ore might easily be found. They were to smelt as 
much of the "blood-metal" as possible and bring it back to the 
principal Lowlife settlement of Hidden Springs as soon as the 
Tanu search parties withdrew. The iron was to be kept a secret 
from the Firvulag, since their loyalty was strongly tinged with 
expedience, and no Lowlife knew how long the shaky alliance 
might last. 
Amerie would go to Hidden Springs and reside in Madame's 
own house. There her arm could heal and she could minister 
to the outlaw humans, who had lived for years with neither a 
physician nor a priest. Meanwhile, messengers would go to 
other Lowlife settlements thinly scattered about Europe, at- tempting to attract volunteers for 
the Finiah attack—now ten- tatively scheduled for the last week in September. 
In the Firvulag stronghold of High Vrazel, the little expe-dition 
met with a skeptical King Yeochee, who warned that 
the regions east of the Black Forest were full of Howlers, 
deformed mutant Firvulag only nominally under his authority. 
He presented Madame with a royal order commanding the 
cooperation of Sugoll, reputed to rule the Howlers in the regions 
around the Danube headwaters. 
On the fifth day after leaving High Vrazel, in the Vosges 
Mountains, the expedition arrived at the Rhine—and encoun-tered 
disaster in the shape of a pig the size of an ox. This.creature attacked from ambush, killing 
Stefanko and badly 
wounding Chief Burke. Fitharn urged that they turn back; but 
the humans feared that if they delayed, the Firvulag might seek 
out the Ship's Grave themselves. Frail Martha, who had been 

forced to give birth to four children in quick succession as a 
Tanu slave, began to hemorrhage. Nevertheless, she was firm 
in demanding that they press on—and so five of them did, 
with the dauntless Felice carrying Martha until she was well 
enough to resume hiking. Slowly, the expedition made its way up the great escarpment 
on the eastern Rhine shore, into the eerie zone they named the 
Fungus Forest, which crowned the highland where the modern 
Schwarzwald lies. It was not until September eighteenth that 
they reached the Feldberg, home of the Howler lord, Sugoll. 
This individual, wearing a handsome illusory body to screen 
hideous deformities, toyed with the humans while his horde of 
goblinesque subjects projected hatred and fear of the interlo-pers, 
demanding their death. 
Claude brought about a reprieve when he explained the cause 
of the Howler mutation to Sugoll: The population had split 
away from their western brethren hundreds of years earlier, 
and had inadvertently settled in a region rich in radioactive 
minerals. These, combined with the exotic sensitivity to ra-diation, 
had caused the terrible birth defects. There was hope 
for the Howlers, Claude said, if they would move out of this 
area and, using their powers of shape-shifting to assume a more 
attractive aspect, resume mating with normal Firvulag. The 
Howlers might further be helped by the skills of a genetic 
engineer from the Galactic Milieu; but unfortunately, such a 
skilled scientist would surely have been enslaved by the Tanu 
for their own purposes. 
To express his gratitude, Sugoll assisted the expedition. The 
subterranean source of the Danube rose only a short distance 
away. A single day's travel on this would bring boaters to the 
open river, which flowed so swiftly and smoothly that they 
might hope to reach the Ries Crater in only a few days more. 
Once again the five people set off. Richard's navigating 
skill told them when they had reached the approximate lon-gitude 
of the Ship's Grave. On September twenty-second, they 
arrived at the crater, around the rim of which stood forty-three 
exotic flying machines, layered in dust and lichen. A cursory 
inspection convinced Richard and Martha that the exotic craft 
were indeed gravo-magnetically powered, quite similar to the.machines of the Galactic Milieu. 
Cleaned up, refueled with 
distilled water, with the exotic controls deciphered, one of those 
thousand-year-old birds might still fly. 
Felice found Lugonn—but the golden torc was not around 
the ancient hero's neck. Years ago, a ramapithecine had in-vaded 
the parked flyer where Lugonn rested and had stolen the 
glittering bauble. Frustrated again in her quest, Felice reacted 
with great violence. 
Richard and Martha, who had become lovers during the 
long trek, set about to repair a single flyer and the photon-projecting 
Spear, which was found next to the skeleton in 
armor. Time was growing perilously short; but if even one day 
remained before the Truce on October first, the Firvulag would 
join with the Lowlives in an attack upon the Rhineside city of 
Finiah, source of the vital element barium, without which no 
type of torc could be made. 
Richard tested the flyer successfully on the twenty-sixth. 
But Martha's old affliction had returned, and she weakened 
from heavy loss of blood. In spite of this, she and Richard 
made plans to flee together immediately after he had assisted 
in the bombardment of Finiah. Three days later, at dusk on the 
twenty-ninth of September, the flyer landed at Hidden Springs 
with the Spear ready for use. Martha was in shock from the 

hemorrhaging, and Amerie could only rush her away for trans-fusions, 
praying for a miracle. 
Down on the western bank of the Rhine, a Lowlife army 
waited in a secret camp opposite Finiah. The city, gorgeously 
illuminated with twinkling lights, was still undisturbed at dawn 
on the thirtieth. Chief Burke was ready, together with several 
hundred free humans, many of them armed with iron. The 
Firvulag army under Sharn the Younger was also on alert— 
although still skeptical—poised to attack on two fronts should 
the promised aerial bombardment materialize. 
Richard piloted the flyer to a position above the Tanu citadel. 
Screened by Madame Guderian's metapsychic power, the craft 
prepared to attack, with the photon weapon manned by the 
rock-cutting paleontologist. Claude fired twice and missed, but 
his third shot broke the Rhineside wall, allowing penetration 
by the Lowlives and a large unit of Firvulag. Changing targets, 
the old man demolished a wall on the other side of the city; 
Ayfa, general of the Warrior Ogresses, led in a second prong 
of attackers opposite the main strike. With power in the Spear 
running low, Claude knew that there only remained enough.energy for a single great blast at the 
strategic barium mine in 
the heart of Finiah. 
But now there came streaming up from the city a train of 
glowing knights mounted on chaliko chargers. Velteyn and his 
Flying Hunt had penetrated Madame's illusion and identified 
the enemy. The psychocreative lord sent balls of lightning 
soaring into the open hatch of the aircraft. Dodging, Claude 
fired, striking the mine squarely. Before Richard could get them 
away, the globes of psychic energy did their work: Claude was 
seriously burned, Richard lost an eye, and Madame lay on the 
floor of the smoldering flight deck, surrounded by toxic fumes. 
Half mad with pain, Richard crash-landed the flyer at Hid-den 
Springs. At the same time, a successful invasion of the 
Tanu city was being carried out by combined human and Fir-vulag 
forces. The battle of Finiah lasted twenty-four hours. At 
the end of that time the barium mine was destroyed, the city 
was in ruins, the Tanu population was slain or had fled, and 
the enslaved human inhabitants were faced with a choice that, 
for some, was oddly difficult: Live free or Die. 
Richard awoke in Hidden Springs and discovered Martha's 
body laid out in the Lowlife chapel. Remembering the promises 
they had made, he took her up and stumbled to the still-op-erational 
flyer. Madame and Claude were going to recover, 
and no doubt the old woman would press ahead with her scheme 
to free humanity. But not Richard. He had a plan of his own. 
Waving farewell to Amerie, he launched the gravo-magnetic 
craft into an orbit thousands of kilometers above Pliocene Earth 
and began to wait. 
Far below, Felice was trudging through the forest toward 
smoking Finiah. She was too late for the war, but somehow 
or other she would find a golden torc in the ruined city and 
fulfill her promise to take the Tanu. 
The other four members of Group Green encountered an 
utterly different face of the Many-Colored Land. 
Six weeks earlier, The Tanu overlord, Creyn, had mounted 
his chaliko and departed Castle Gateway. With a minimal escort of three soldiers, he had led 
Elizabeth, Bryan, Aiken Drum, 
Stein, Sukey Davies, and Raimo Hakkinen along the track 
toward the Rhone River. As they traveled, the Tanu man told 
these privileged prisoners something of the wonderful life that 
awaited them. They would take ship at the riverside city of 

Roniah, and after a journey of five or six days arrive in the.Tanu capital, Muriah. There Stein 
would be healed of the 
injuries suffered in his escape attempt. Aiken and Raimo and 
Sukey would learn how to use the metafunctions made newly 
operant by their silver torcs. Bryan would assist in a cultural 
analysis project that had been initiated by the Tanu King him-self. 
And Elizabeth... her destiny would be the most splendid 
of all. Never before had the time-gate admitted a genuinely 
operant human metapsychic to the Many-Colored Land. (It was 
prohibited by Galactic statute.) Elizabeth's mind might be con-valescent, 
but when she recovered, her farsensing and redactive 
abilities would far exceed those of any Tanu Great Ones. Creyn, 
himself a skilled redactor, was humbly aware that her probing 
and healing powers dwarfed his own. Elizabeth would not 
receive the common initiation. No, she would go to the Ship-spouse 
who was the guide and guardian of both exotic races; 
she would go to Brede. 
The exotic healer's promises only filled Elizabeth with fear 
and dismay. There was a good reason why the Galactic Milieu 
forbade operant metapsychics to pass through the time-gate. 
In the Milieu, all persons with great mental power—human 
and nonhuman—were bound in a benevolent Unity, incapable 
of any selfish action that would harm civilization. But bereft 
of the Unity ... 
Elizabeth felt as though she were the only mature adult cast 
away in a world of children—and malicious children at that, 
who would seek to use her. This must not be permitted. 
Elizabeth was roused from her reverie of despair by the 
necessity of rescuing Sukey. This young woman, who also had 
redactive power, had gone snooping into the mind of uncon-scious 
Stein. Discovering his longstanding psychic hurts, Sukey 
tried inexpertly to drain them. Only Elizabeth's intervention 
prevented the deeply traumatized Viking from crushing his 
would-be healer into imbecility. Temporarily postponing non-involvement, 
Elizabeth began to teach Sukey proper techniques 
so that she would not harm herself or the man she was growing 
to love. Before the trip south concluded, Sukey was able to 
bring Stein genuine relief from mental dysfunctions that had 
plagued him from childhood. Stein in turn reached out and 
pledged himself to her. Their two minds, operating on the most 
intimate telepathic level of his gray, and her silver, torc, took 
each other for husband and wife. Such a union, Creyn had 
warned, was forbidden to silver-torc women on pain of death;.but the lovers hid their secret well. 
No one knew the truth but 
Elizabeth. 
The madcap Aiken Drum's reaction to his new mind-power and the dazzling splendor of the Many- 
Colored Land was pro-foundly 
different. He gloried in both. In Roniah, he was the 
star of a rowdy debauch and the darling of insatiable Tanu 
women. Later, he and his new crony, Raimo, assumed the 
illusory forms of butterflies and took an impromptu tour of 
the riverside city. This ended with the partial destruction of the Roniah dock as part of a 
metapsychic practical joke. 
Creyn programmed what he thought was a firm curb upon 
the trickster's metafunctions. However, as the journey length-ened, 
it became evident that Aiken—self-confessed Connect-icut 
Yankee in King Arthur's court, mechanical genius, recidivist 
delinquent, charmer, wearer of a golden suit with a hundred 
pockets—was something far out of the ordinary run of latent 
metapsychic. The mental powers that had been chained in his 
skull for twenty-one years of misspent youth were of incredible 

potential. Elizabeth saw this clearly—and so, to a more limited 
extent, did Creyn. 
The boat carrying the travelers plunged over a torrential 
slope, la Glissade Formidable, into the prehistoric Mediterra-nean 
Basin. Sailing over shallow lagoons, it approached the 
Tanu capital, Muriah, which lay at the tip of the Balearic 
Peninsula. Most of the human passengers were increasingly anxious as the voyage neared its end; 
but not Aiken Drum. His 
silver torc, instead of merely freeing his metafunctions, had 
acted as a trigger to a psychic avalanche. Control circuits that 
had easily held normal human minds in thrall burned out before 
Aiken's mental blaze; and his powers, unlike the gentle ones 
of Elizabeth, were fully oriented toward aggression. Behind 
the grinning face of the young man in the shining golden suit 
was a personality that might, in time, seek to dominate not 
only the exotic races of Pliocene Earth, but humanity as well. 
Now begin Volume 2, which follows Aiken, Elizabeth, 
Stein, and Bryan on the sixth day after their passage through 
the time-gate into the world of Pliocene Earth...1 
THE DRAGONFLY HOVERED, A GOLDEN SPARK, JUST ABOVE THE 
bare mast of the motionless boat. 
As the first breezes broke the water with cat's-paw dimpling, 
the dragonfly darted off. He zoomed powerfully into the sky 
and hovered once again. The boat below him was now trans-formed 
into a lonely speck amid a pastel expanse of shallow 
lagoons and saltflats, all blurred in pearly mist. 
Higher! His shape-shifted wings lofted him into the dawn. 
Keen compound eyes that covered most of his head showed 
him the continental slope's dark rampart along the northern 
horizon: the brink of Europe punctuated by a single towering 
cloud that marked the cascade of the Rhone River, pouring 
down a vast slope of sediment into the nearly waterless Med-iterranean 
Basin of Pliocene Earth that was called the Empty 
Sea. 
Should he fly toward the mainland? His wings had the strength 
to carry him more than 100 kilometers per hour for brief sprints. 
He knew it would be easy for him to retrace the journey the 
boat had made on the previous day; or he could fly eastward 
to the upthrust mass of Corsica-Sardinia, where Creyn had said 
no Tanu lived. 
He could go anywhere he liked. He was free now. 
Gone were the mental restraints programmed upon him by 
the exotic slavemaster. This morning when he awoke, the silver 
torc at his throat was cold rather than warm, the neural circuitry 
of the psychocoercive device overloaded and rendered useless 
by his mind's new power. The metapsychic latencies that the 
torc had unlocked remained operant. And were still growing. 
He reached out with his farsense, listening. He perceived 
the slow-cycling rhythms of the seven people asleep in the craft.beneath him, and farther afield, 
telepathic murmurs from other 
boats scattered about the Great Lagoon. In the distant south— 
he concentrated his farsense, clumsily attempting fine focus— 
was a conglomerate mental shimmer. Fascinating! Could it be 
coming from the Tanu capital city of Muriah, the goal toward 
which they had been traveling these past five days? 
If he gave a hail, would anyone down there answer? Try! 
There came a hard bright response, shocking in its eager-ness: 
O shining boymind who? 
Well... Aiken Drum that's who. 
Hold still littlemind so far yet so glowing. Ah! 
No. Stop that—! 

Do not pull away Shining One. What can you be? 
Let go dammit! 
Do not withdraw I think I know you... 
Suddenly, he was overcome by an unprecedented fear. That 
distant unknown was locking onto him, coming at him in some 
manner down the pathway of his own mind's beam. He pulled 
away from the grasp and discovered too late that it was going 
to take almost all of his strength to sever the connection. He 
tore free. He found himself falling through thin air, his dra-gonfly 
shape shifted back to vulnerable humanity. Wind whis-tled 
in his ears. He plunged toward the boat, mind and voice 
screaming, and only managed to regain control and the insect 
form a scant moment before disaster. Trembling and funked 
out, he settled to the tip of the mast. 
His projected panic had awakened the others. The boat be-gan 
to rock, generating concentric ripples in the pale lagoon. 
Elizabeth and Creyn emerged from the covered passenger com-partment 
to stare at him; and Raimo, with an expression of 
bleary incomprehension on his upturned face; and scowling 
Stein, with worried little Sukey; and Highjohn, the skipper, 
who yelled, "I know that's you up there, Aiken Drum! God 
help you if you've been playing any of your tricks with my 
boat!" 
The boatman's shout brought out the last passenger, the 
torcless anthropologist, Bryan Grenfell, who was feeling testy 
and was aware of none of the telepathic querying now being 
hurled at the dragonfly by the others. "Is it necessary to rock 
the boat quite so much?" 
"Aiken, come down," Creyn said aloud.."Not bloody likely," the dragonfly replied. Wings abuzz, 
the insect prepared to flee. 
The Tanu raised one slender hand in an ironic gesture. "Fly away, then, you fool. But be sure you 
understand what you're 
renouncing. It makes no difference that you've escaped the 
torc. We were expecting that. Allowances have been made. 
Special privileges have been arranged for you in Muriah." 
A doubting laugh. "I've already had a little hint of that." 
"So?" Creyn was unconcerned. "If you'd kept your wits 
about you, you'd know that you have nothing to fear from 
Mayvar. On the contrary! But make no mistake—even without 
the silver torc, she is able to detect you now, wherever you 
might go. Running away would be the worst mistake you could 
possibly make. There's nothing for you out there, all alone. 
Your fulfillment lies with us, in Muriah. Now come down. It's 
time we resumed our journey. We should arrive in the capital 
tonight, and you can judge for yourself whether or not I've 
told the truth." 
Abruptly, the tall exotic man withdrew into the passenger 
compartment. The small group of humans remained on deck, 
gasping. 
"Oh—what the hell," said the dragonfly. 
It spiraled down, landed at the skipper's feet, and became 
a little man clad in a gold-fabric costume all covered with 
pockets. Self-confidence completely restored, Aiken Drum 
grinned his golliwog grin. 
"Maybe I will stick around awhile. For as long as it suits 
me." 
That evening, when the throng of Tanu riders came to wel-come 
the boat to the shores of Aven, Bryan could think of only 
a single thing: that Mercy might be somewhere among the 
exotic cavalcade. And so he rushed from one side of the boat 
to the other while a team of twenty stout helladotheria, looking 

something like giant okapis, were hitched to the craft in prep-aration 
for its being hauled up the long rollered way to Muriah. 
There was a bright gibbous moon. A kilometer or so above the 
docks, which lay on a saltflat surrounded by weathered masses 
of striped evaporite, the Tanu capital city glittered on the dark 
peninsular height like an Earthbound galaxy. 
"Mercy!" Bryan called. "Mercy, I'm here!" 
There were numbers of human men and women riding to-gether 
with the tall exotics, dressed, like them, either in faceted.and spiked glass armor or richly 
jeweled gauze robes. The 
flameless torches that they carried cast beams of many colors. 
The riders laughed at Bryan and ignored the questions that he 
tried to shout amidst the tumult of the hitching. 
So many of the human women perched on the great chalikos 
seemed to have auburn hair! Again and again Bryan strained 
to catch a closer glimpse of a likely one. But always when the 
beautiful rider approached it was not Mercy Lamballe—nor 
even one who really looked like her. 
Aiken Drum stood on one of the boat seats posturing like 
a gilded puppet, throwing out teasing or challenging quips that 
provoked exotic hilarity and increased the bedlam. The Finno-Canadian 
woodsman, Ramio Hakkinen, hung over the pneu-matic 
gunwale of the boat kissing the proffered hands of the 
ladies and toasting the men with swigs from his silver flask. 
In contrast, Stein Oleson sat back in the shadows with one 
huge arm curved protectively around Sukey, both of them ap-prehensive. 
Skipper Highjohn came to stand beside Bryan in the bows. 
He fingered the gray torc around his neck and laughed out loud. 
"We'll be on our way any minute now, Bryan. What a wel-come! 
I've never seen anything like it. Just look at your tricky 
little gold friend up there! They'll have a hell of a time taming 
that one—if they ever do!" 
Bryan looked at the smiling brown face blankly. "What? 
I'm—I'm sorry, Johnny. I wasn't even listening. I thought I 
saw—someone. A woman I once knew." 
With kind firmness the boatman pressed the anthropologist 
down onto one of the benches. Teamsters whipped up the 
hellads and the boat began to roll, accompanied by cheers and 
a bell-loud clangor from the escort, some of whom were beating 
their gem-studded shields with glowing swords. From nearly 
a hundred throats and minds came the Tanu Song, its melody 
oddly familiar to Bryan, for all that the words were alien: 
Li gan nol po'kone niesi, 
'Kone o lan li pred near, 
U taynel compri la neyn, 
Ni blepan algar dedone. 
Shompri pone, a gabrinel, 
Shal u car metan presi, 
Nar metan u bar taynel o pogekone, 
Car metan sed gone mori..Bryan's fingers dug into the boat's splashcover fabric. The fantastic 
panoply of riders swirled along the towpath as the 
boat mounted a long slope. There was no vegetation this close to the salty lagoon, but eroded 
lumps and pillars of mineral 
loomed in the wavering shadows like the ruins of some elfin palace. The train entered a depression 
between steep cliffs and 
bright Muriah disappeared from view. The hellad-drawn boat 
and its faerie escort seemed to move toward a black tunnel mouth flanked by huge broken cherubim. 
The Song echoed from overlooming walls. 
An old imagery reasserted itself to Bryan. A cave—deep 
and dark—and a loved thing lost inside. He was a small boy 
and the time was six million years into the future: in England, 

in the Mendip Hills where the family had a cottage. And his 
kitten, Cinders, wandered off, and he searched for three days. And finally he had stumbled upon 
the entrance to the little 
cave, barely large enough for his eight-year-old body to wriggle 
through. He had stood staring at the fetid black hole for more than an hour, knowing that he 
should search it but terrified at 
the thought. 
In the end, he had taken a small electric torch and wormed 
his way in. The passage twisted and angled downward. Scratched 
by sharp stones and nearly breathless with fear, he had slithered 
on. The stench from bat droppings was dreadful. All daylight vanished at a turn in the narrowing 
corridor; and then the crack 
opened into a deep cavern, too large to be illuminated by his 
little flashlight. He aimed the beam downward and saw no 
bottom. "Cinders!" he called, and his boy's voice reverberated in broken wails. There was a horrid 
rustle and a faint sound 
of squeaking. From the cave roof high above, a mist of acrid 
bat urine drifted upon him. 
Choking and retching, he had tried to turn around, but the crevice was too narrow. There was 
nothing for it but to back 
out on his stomach, tears streaming down his cheeks, knowing 
that at any moment the bats might fly into his face and sink 
their teeth into nose and lips and cheeks and ears. He dropped the torch as he hunched along. 
Maybe the light 
would frighten the bats. He kept going, centimeter by centi-meter 
backward over rough stones, his knees and elbows getting 
rawer. The passage would never end! It was already much 
longer than it had been when he entered! And it was tighter, 
too, squeezing him beneath unimaginable tons of black rock 
until he knew it would press away his l i f e ....He came out. Too weak even to sob, he had lain 
there until the sun was 
low. When he was able to get up and stagger home, he found 
Cinders lapping a saucer of cream in the back garden. The 
ghastly trip into the cave had been for nothing. 
"I hate you!" he had screamed, bringing his mother on the 
run. But by the time she reached him he was cradling the black 
kitten against his bruised and filthy cheek, stroking it while the 
sound of its purring helped slow his thudding heart. 
Cinders had lived for another fifteen years, fat and com-placent, 
while Bryan's boyish devotion to the animal dwindled 
away into vague fondness. But he would live forever with the 
horror of the loved thing lost, the fear and the gush of hate at 
the end because his bravery had been wasted. And now he was 
entering another chasm... 
The friendly voice of the skipper drew him back. "The lady 
you're looking for. Did they tell you she was down here in 
Muriah?" 
"An interviewer back at Castle Gateway recognized her 
picture. He said she had been sent here. Creyn seemed to hint 
that if I cooperated with the local authorities along professional 
lines, she and I might—meet." 
He hesitated only for a moment before unbuttoning his breast 
pocket and taking out the durofilm sheet. Highjohn stared at 
Mercy's self-luminous portrait. 
"What a beautiful, haunted face! I don't know who she is 
here, Bry, but then I'm on the river most of the time. God 
knows I'd never forget her if I ever did catch sight of her. 
Those eyes—! You poor bastard." 
"You can say that again, Johnny." 
"Why did she come here?" the skipper asked. 
"I don't know. Ridiculous, isn't it, Johnny? I knew her only 

a single day. And then I had to leave her for some work that 
seemed to be important. When I returned, she was gone. All 
I could do was follow after. It was the only choice open to 
me. Do you understand?" 
"Sure, Bry. I understand. My own reasons for coming weren't 
that different. Except that no one was waiting... But there's 
something you've got to expect, when you do find her. She'll 
be changed." "She was a latent. They'll have given her a silver torc. I'm 
aware of that." 
The big riverman shook his head slowly. Once again he.touched his own gray necklet. "There's more 
to it than a latent's 
becoming operant—although God knows, acquiring metafaculties 
all of a sudden has its hazards, so I'm told. But even us grays—without getting any 
metafunctions to speak of— 
gain something fantastic through this torc. Something that we 
never had before." He pursed his thin purplish lips, then sud-denly 
exclaimed, "Listen, man! What do you hear?" 
"They're singing in their Tanu language." 
"And to you, the words mean nothing. But to us collared ones, the Song says well-met, and fearnot, 
and this-is-it, and 
we-you-us! When a human being becomes part of the torced 
society, he gains a whole new level of consciousness. Even us 
grays, with no operant metafunctions, can share in it. It's 
more than telepathy—although that's a part of it. It's a whole 
new form of social intercourse, this mind-to-mind intimacy. 
How the hell can I explain it? Like being a member of some kind of superfamily. You know you 
belong to this great thing 
that keeps rolling along and taking you with it. You'll never be alone in your pain again. Never 
be outside. Never be 
rejected. Any time you need strength or comfort, you can 
dip into the collective resource. It's not a smothering thing 
because you can take as much or as little of it as you choose— 
well, subject to limitations unless you're a gold-wearer. You 
obey orders, just like in the service... But what I'm trying to tell you is that wearing these 
things changes you deep 
inside. It doesn't happen right away, but it does happen. As you wear the torc, you're educated 
whether you want to be 
or not. Your lady is going to be a different person than the 
one you remember." 
"She might not want me. Is that what you're trying to pre-pare 
me for?" 
"I don't know her, Bry. People react in different ways to 
the torcs. Some of them bloom. Most of them." 
The anthropologist did not meet the skipper's dark eyes. 
"And some don't. I see. What happens to the failures?" 
"There aren't too many among us grays. The Tanu have 
worked out a fairish battery of tests to sort out the go and no 
go. Human psychotechnicians working under Lord Gomnol try 
to make sure that no normal human gets a gray torc unless his 
or her PS profile shows that the device will be generally ben-eficial 
to the individual's functioning. They don't want to waste 
the torcs because they're not easy to make. If your psycho-social 
tests show that you're a maverick, likely to whack out.unless you're allowed to stew in your own 
independent juice, 
then you don't get a gray collar. They'll coerce you in more 
conventional ways to make you a productive member of their 
society—or else give up and toss you into the discard. But the 
real winners here in Exile are the torc wearers. The Tanu know 
they can trust us because they can share our thoughts and control 
our rewards. So we're allowed positions of responsibility. Look 
at me! Tanu are lousy swimmers. But I've had members of the 

High Table, the top Tanu administration, riding in my boat." 
"With never a qualm, I trust." 
"Okay—laugh. But I'd never do anything to endanger the 
lives of the exotics and they know it. It would be unthinkable!" 
"But you're not free." "Nobody is ever free," the skipper said. "Was I a goddam 
lily of the field back in the Milieu, piloting my ferryboat on 
Tallahatchie with Lee driving me crazy jealous? Here in this 
world, with this torc, I follow Tanu orders. And in return I get 
a share in the kind of mind-pleasures that only the metapsychics 
got in our twenty-second century. It's like seeing with a thou-sand 
eyes. Or going high with a thousand bodies all at once. 
I can't tell you how it is. I'm no poet. No psychologist, either." 
"I'm beginning to understand, Johnny. The torcs are cer-tainly 
more complex than I first thought." 
"They make life a lot easier for the people who can stand 
up to 'em. Just take the matter of language. In our Milieu, the 
exotic sociologists knew how vital it was for each single race 
to have a single language. That's why we humans had to agree 
to become monolingual as a condition to Milieu acceptance— 
and Standard English won hands down. But with this mental 
speech, any kind of verbal misunderstanding is impossible! 
When another person mindspeaks to you, you know exactly 
what the message is." 
Half to himself, Bryan murmured, "Barbaric. That's why 
the Milieu places such strict limitations on the metas. Especially 
the human metas." 
"I don't get your point there, Bry. See what I mean? If you 
wore a torc, I'd know exactly what you were trying to say." 
"Forget it, Johnny. Just my cynicism showing its fangs." 
"To me, the mental unity seems ideal. But then, I'm just a 
dumb sailorman whose lover went over to another. Now if the 
two of us had been able to understand each other from the 
start... aw, the hell with it. Now there are thousands of people 
who love me. In a manner of speaking.".The skipper waved at the procession of riders. Almost all 
of them immediately waved back. Bryan felt something cold 
clutch at his bowels. "Johnny?" 
The skipper broke out of his reverie. "Mm?" "Not all of the time-travelers are tested for 
psychocompa-tibility 
before being torced. Stein wasn't. They collared him when he became a menace." 
Highjohn shrugged. "You can understand why. The torc can 
be used to subdue rebellious people on a short-range or long-range 
basis. Since your pal is still with us, I presume they have 
some plans for him. Certain types—medics and some other specialists who rarely come through the 
gate—they get collared 
willy-nilly, too. Essential occupations." 
"And the metapsychic latents—people such as Aiken and 
Sukey and Raimo? They were apparently put into silver collars 
as soon as their latency was detected, without consideration of 
any adverse mental consequences." "Well, the silvers are a special case," Highjohn admitted. 
"There's the matter of the genes." 
Bryan looked at him. 
"The Tanu use human women in their breeding scheme, 
Bry. Some human men as well. Normals, latents, both kinds 
get used. But the latents are the most valuable to them. I'm 
not too clear on the specifics of the thing, but somehow they 
figure that putting human latent genes into their pool will speed 
the day when the whole Tanu race goes operant. You know... 
just like the human race is going operant back in the Milieu." 
"But the Tanu are operant now, with their golden torcs!" 
"Limited, man, limited. Even the best of 'em can't measure 
up to masterclass metas in the Milieu. And none of the Tanu 

are a patch on our Grand Masters. Nope—they've got a long 
way to go in the mind-power game. But this genetic scheme 
is supposed to give them a boost. The Tanu are great schemers. 
Plotting and fighting are their favorite sports—followed closely 
by screwing, drinking, and feasting. The gene plan is just one 
of the ways they're trying to consolidate their advantage over 
the Firvulag. You know about the Little People, don't you? 
Racial brothers to the Tanu. No-torc operants—but only in 
illusion making, creativity, and some farsensing, for the most 
part. Firvulag genes are strong recessives among Tanu, so the 
Tanu mothers keep throwing Firvulag babies. And the little 
gnomies are physically tougher and reproduce a hell of a lot.faster than the Tanu do. So if the 
Tanu want to keep control 
of Exile, they've got their work cut out for them." 
"I'm starting to appreciate the situation," Bryan said. "But, 
come back to the silver-torcs. If they're indiscriminately col-lared, 
then some of them must whip out under the neural ten-sion." 
"True. Some go mad. Any kind of torc can do that if the 
personality of the wearer is fundamentally incompatible. Even 
the pure Tanu have their zonk-outs. Black-torcs, they call 'em. 
However, even if a silver goes bananas, the Tanu try to save 
the genes. A woman will be put on oblivion hold and used as 
brood stock until she breaks down. If she can't be restored by 
the healers, her ova can be transplanted to ramas. That often 
doesn't pan out because these exotic folks have a crude reprotechnology—
but they try anyhow." 
"And the male silver-torc dropouts?" 
"Sperm is an easy keeper. As for the bonkered-out 
owner... well, there's always the Hunt. Or the life-offerings." 
"I know about the Hunt." Bryan was grim. "But the life-offering 
thing is new. What is it—human sacrifice?" 
"More like ritual execution of criminals and hopelessly unfit 
persons. As I understand sacrifices, the victim was supposed 
to be noble or pure or something. Well, the Tanu have that 
kind of ritual killing only once in a blue moon—like when 
there's a new King or Queen inaugurated. Like the regular life-offerings 
come twice a year. At the tail end of the Grand 
Combat in early November and at the Grand Loving, in May. 
It's more like a clean sweep of the jails and soft rooms than 
anything else. Uncivilized by Milieu standards, but not all that 
bad an idea when you get right down to it." 
Don't read my mind, Johnny, Bryan thought. Aloud, he 
said, "How do the human silvers become golds?" 
The skipper gave a basso profundo laugh. "There's ways 
and ways. Your weird little pal is a shoo-in candidate!" 
Bryan was at a loss for words. Yes, Aiken might fit in very 
well in this mad world of wondrous powers and appalling 
barbarity. But what of Mercy, fey and fearful? 
Tall Creyn, with his red-and-white robes billowing in the 
breeze, came into the bows area, followed by Elizabeth. "We're 
almost there, Bryan. You can see the High King's palace now— 
that complex with bars of golden light and the hundreds of 
bright lamps spaced along the facade. We'll be ending our 
journey there. After we've rested for a few hours, there'll be.a supper feast in honor of you new 
arrivals. King Thagdal and 
Queen Nontusvel will be there themselves to bid you welcome." 
"Do all newcomers get such a splendid reception?" Elizabeth 
inquired. Half hidden behind the towering Tanu, she was an 
unobtrusive figure in her red denim jumpsuit. 
"Not all." Creyn smiled down at her. "Your arrival is a very 
special occasion. It's been an honor for me to escort you. I 

hope to be able to work with you at Redact House in later 
days." 
The realization burst upon Bryan. Of course. The magnif-icent 
escort had really come to catch a glimpse of Elizabeth! 
And the banquet with the King and Queen in attendance would 
be primarily for her. What a priceless catch the exotic time-fishers 
had made in this quiet, repressive woman with the 
unfathomable mental powers. And what new plans the genetic 
schemers must be hatching! Poor Elizabeth. Bryan wondered 
whether she was yet aware of the kind of temptation that the 
Tanu were sure to offer; and whether she realized the deadly 
danger that she faced if she should decline to cooperate... 
Creyn continued to point out features of the capital city to 
the two of them. "The largest of the structures, those with the 
surmounting towers and faceted beacons, are the headquarters 
of the five great Guilds Mental. You might think of them as 
metapsychic clans—for there is more of a family than a profes-sional 
relationship among the membership. The violet and am-ber 
lights adorn the Hall of Farsensors, which is presided over 
by the venerable Lady Mayvar Kingmaker. The Guild of Cre-ators 
has its headquarters lit with aquamarine and white. At 
the present time, this group is led by Lord Aluteyn Crafts-master. 
However, his authority has been recently challenged 
and there may be changes made after the manifestations of 
power take place at the Grand Combat. The blue and amber 
lights symbolize the Coercer Guild, whose head is Sebi-Gom-nol, 
a human wearer of the gold. Beyond that complex rises 
the home of the psychokinetics, the movers and shakers who 
are led by Lord Nodonn Battlemaster. He is at this time resident 
in his home city of Goriah. The PK Guild has rose and amber 
for its heraldic colors." 
"And your association?" Elizabeth asked. 
"The Guild of Redactors has its headquarters outside of the 
city, on the southern slope of the Mount of Heroes. The white-andred 
illumination is not visible from this side of the pen-.insula. Our guild is headed by Lord 
Dionket, Chief Healer of 
the Tanu." 
A small figure in a suit of metallic fiber came slithering 
forward. Aiken Drum doffed his hat and bowed. His grinning 
face was shadowed and masklike in the light of the escort's 
torches. "I couldn't help but eavesdrop, Chief. How is it that a human 
being—this Gumball, or whatever his name is—can head up 
one of your big corporations?" 
Creyn's reply was cold. "Lord Sebi-Gomnol is a person of 
extraordinary talents—both metapsychic and scientific. After 
you meet him, you'll know why we hold him in such high 
esteem." 
"How did he get his gold?" Aiken persisted. 
Even Bryan was aware of the palpable revulsion flowing 
from the exotic healer. "You'd better hear that from his own 
lips as well." 
Aiken gave a wicked chuckle. "I can hardly wait. Old Gum-ball 
sounds like the kinda guy who could even give me a few 
tips!" 
You will leave us Aiken Drum. 
Anything you command Chief! 
Elizabeth frowned at the retreating back of the golliwog 
youth. To analyze this interesting implication was going to take 
some patient work. She hoped Lord Gomnol would be present 
at the feast. 
Bryan was asking, "Are the rest of the buildings in the city 

private, then?" 
"By no means," Creyn said. "Muriah is a working capital. 
The persons resident here are primarily concerned with the 
administration of our Many-Colored Land. Our education fa-cilities 
are here and certain other vital operations as well. But 
you will discover, Bryan, that we are not nearly so formal in 
these high matters as your Galactic Milieu will be six million 
years into the future. We have a small population in our High 
Kingdom and a fairly simple culture. Many workings of our 
government are handled family-fashion. You will be encour-aged 
to study the social structure very closely. There are things 
you must tell us about ourselves." 
The anthropologist inclined his head. "It'll be a fascinating 
project. I can't think of a Milieu culture even remotely resem-bling 
yours." 
The boat was finally drawing up to a quasi-Babylonian ed-.ifice of white stone, lavishly adorned 
with flowering plants that dripped over stepped, lamplighted balconies. The portico of 
the palace fronted on a spur of the rollered way. There were no casual mobs of human onlookers to 
be seen, but a large 
group of liveried human attendants stood waiting, together with 
forty or fifty little ramas dressed in white tabards ornamented with the stylized golden male 
face, emblem of the sovereign. 
As the boat came to a halt, the mounted escort rode partway 
up a flight of shallow steps that led to the palace entrance. The 
riders sat straight in their saddles, raised their torches on high, and formed into ranks like an 
honor guard. 
There was a gong sound and a flourish of trumpets. A stately Tanu woman dressed all in silver and 
attended by silver-ar- mored human soldiers came to the head of the stairs. She held 
out both arms toward the travelers in the boat and sang a strophe in the Tanu language. The riders 
chorused a response at the 
top of their lungs. Creyn interpreted. "The Exalted Lady Eadone, Dean of 
Guilds and eldest daughter of the Thagdal, greets you. Elizabeth will answer." 
Skipper Highjohn had been busy amidships winding out a gangplank that settled onto the lowest 
step. He winked at Eliz-abeth 
and held out a big brown hand to assist her to disembark. An abrupt silence fell. The brisk 
evening breeze whipped 
the pennons, capes, and robes of the chaliko riders. Elizabeth in her simple red suit looked lost 
in the midst of the pageant; 
but her physical and mental voice was firm and quite as im-pressive 
as that of the King's daughter. She spoke a phrase in the Tanu language and then repeated it in 
English: "Thank you for welcoming us to this beautiful city. We are impressed by the splendor and 
richness of your 
Many-Colored Land, which is so different from the primitive 
world we expected to find six million years into our past. We greet you with all goodwill. We hope 
you will be patient with us as we learn your ways. And we pray that there will be peace 
between our two races through the length of the world's age." 
Crash! went the drums and cymbals. The orderly scene dissolved into a carnival whirl. Chaliko 
riders galloped up and 
down the steps, cheering, laughing, and singing. After a cour-teous 
nod to Elizabeth, the Lady Eadone vanished into the palace. Attendants and ramas came swarming to 
assist the time-travelers and gather up their baggage. 
Elizabeth came quickly back onto the boat before the wild.throng could engulf her. Distracted, all 
barriers up against the 
mental cacophony, she went forward to say goodbye to Skipper 
Highjohn. 
Bryan was there, leaning against the doorframe of the wheel-house, 
a look of horror on his face. Creyn passed Elizabeth, smiling. "It's quite all right. 
Highjohn did such a fine job in conveying us that I wanted to 
give him his reward immediately." The redactor stepped onto 
the gangplank and vanished into the crowd. 
Elizabeth came and stood beside Bryan, looking into the 

wheelhouse. The boatman lay on the deck beside the steering 
housing. His old U.S. Navy cap had fallen from his head. His 
eyes were rolled back so that only the whites were visible. 
Ribbons of saliva were spun from his open mouth to his kinky 
black beard. The gray torc was slimy with sweat. Highjohn's 
hands scratched at the decking and his body arched up again 
and again in convulsive spasms. 
He groaned in ecstasy. 
Bryan whispered, "Are they all doing it to you, Johnny? 
All of them, curing the loneliness?" 
With gentle firmness he drew Elizabeth back and closed the 
wheelhouse door. Then they followed the others into the palace 
of the Tanu King..2 
A GAUDY THRONG EDDIED AROUND THE FEAST-HALL ANTE-room 
in anticipation of the arrival of what a courtier had called 
Most Exalted Personages. Both humans and Tanu wore filmy 
robes in different styles. Most of the women sported fantastic 
wired and jeweled headdresses. Music filled the air, played by 
an unseen orchestra that featured flutes, harps, and glocken-spiels. 
Bryan and Elizabeth and Stein and Sukey and Raimo had 
met again after an interval of three hours, brought into a railed 
enclosure separate from the rest of the crowd of dinner guests. 
The time-travelers stared at one another and then burst into 
laughter, so bemusing had been their transformation. 
"But they took away my other clothes!" Raimo protested, 
his face aflame. "And they told me this would be the kind of 
thing the other guys would wear!" 
Stein guffawed. "Talk about giving the ladies a treat—! 
You look like a friggerty ballet dancer. Or Captain Marvel!" 
"Steinie, shut up," said Sukey. "I think Raimo looks fine." 
Glowering, the former woodsman tried to pull his skimpy 
golden cape around his torso. He wore a scarlet leotardlike 
garment with a faint diapre pattern of gold that looked as if it 
had been shrink-wrapped about his muscular body. Golden 
boots and a matching belt completed the ensemble. 
He is packaged for display, Elizabeth realized. With his 
meager psychokinetic ability and low level of intelligence, he 
is destined to be a toy. 
Raimo was scowling at Stein. "At least they got you out of 
that mangy fur kilt." 
The Viking only smiled. He looked magnificent and knew 
it, having been decked out by palace servitors in a deep-green.short tunic of simplest cut, 
together with his own leather collar and belt studded with gold and amber. To this had been added 
an ornate baldric in similar style that supported a bronze two- handed sword in a jeweled 
scabbard. From Stein's great shoul- ders fell a cloak of sherry-colored brocade held by a 
greenstone brooch. He wore his bronze Vikso helmet with the curling 
horns. 
Sukey clung to one arm of this incarnation of Norse divinity. Her gown was of white silken gauze 
with a trailing skirt and close-fitting sleeves. The simplicity of the dress was offset by an 
elaborate headdress resembling a silver halo, ornamented with glowing red gems. The ruby color of 
the stones was repeated in her narrow pendant belt and in the wide bracelets at her wrists. "I 
think they dressed me in the heraldic colors of the clan I'm to be initiated into," Sukey said. 
"The redactors seem to wear red with white or silver. I wonder why you didn't get 
red-and-white regalia, Elizabeth?" The farspeaker said, "I think I look very tasteful in black. 
Perhaps it has a special significance. They did spend a lot of time dressing my hair, at any rate. 
And when the wardrobe mistress saw my diamond ring, she came up with this nice little tiara." "You 
and I make rather a set," Bryan observed. "Elegant 
restraint in the midst of these birds of paradise." 
Elizabeth was amused. "And not bad at all, Doctor, now that you've shed those wrinkled bushcottons 
and the imitation Aussie hat." 
The once-drab anthropologist now wore garments cut from a glistening fabric of deepest blue-green. 

He had narrow trou- sers tucked into silver short boots, a well-tailored jacket piped in silver, 
and a long cape that matched the suit. Elizabeth's costume was also simple. Her loose gown of 
filmy black was 
adorned by a narrow neck-yoke of red metallic fabric; two free- hanging ribands of the same 
material, jeweled and embroi-dered, 
fell from the front and rear of the yoke. It was a style 
that many of the Tanu women wore—although none showed the black-and-red color scheme. Sukey was 
looking around. "I wonder where Aiken is?" Stein muttered, "I don't see how they could make that 
kid any fancier-looking than he already is." "Speak of the devil," Bryan said. A servant pulled 
aside the drapery covering the passage door.that led to their enclosure. The missing member of the 
group 
was ushered in, and Stein's observation proved to be prophetic. 
Aiken Drum was still wearing his own golden suit with the 
hundred pockets. He had added only a black cape that sparkled 
like carbonado and a tall bunch of black feathers fastened be-hind 
the cockade of his broad-brimmed hat. 
"The festivities may now commence!" the jester declared. 
"Maybe we'd better wait for the King and Queen," Elizabeth 
suggested. 
Raimo was indignant. "Would you believe it, Aik? They 
took my flask!" 
"The fewkin' fiends! I'd bring it running to you on little 
bitty feet, Chopper, if I wasn't confused by the layout of this 
place." 
"You could really bring it here?" the ex-woodsman ex-claimed. 
"Why not? You know what whisky means? And akvavit 
and all those other boozy words we know and love? They all 
translate as 'water of life!' All those old folks who put a name 
to strong drink thought that it put the life back into you. So 
why shouldn't I put a little life into the booze? Make it sprout 
legs.. .easy!" 
"I thought they programmed a curb on your metafunctions," 
Elizabeth said. She probed gently and met a well-constructed 
defense. 
Aiken winked. He hooked a finger around his silver torc 
and pulled. The metal necklet seemed to stretch—then snap 
back to solidity. "I've been working on that, sweets. Plus a 
few other things. Want to bet this is going to be one mother 
of a party?" 
"Attaway, buddy!" Raimo cackled. 
"I must say," the shining youth observed, "that the rest of you are really looking up, sartorially 
speaking. You're almost 
as gorgeous as me!" He studied Stein and Sukey in silence for 
a moment, then said, "And let me offer my largest felicitations 
on your union." 
The Viking and his lady stared at Aiken with mingled fear 
and resolution. 
Damn you Aiken, Elizabeth sent. I'll snap your synapses if 
you— 
But the trickster swept on, black eyes alight. "The Tanu 
aren't going to like it, because they had plans of their own for 
you two. But I'm a sentimentalist. Romance must triumph!"."Do you know what you're talking about?" 
Stein's voice was quiet. One ham-sized fist closed over the pommel of his 
bronze sword. 
Aiken skipped close to him. Scandinavian blue eyes bridged 
a fifty-cent gap as they met those of the mischief-maker. Eliz-abeth 
was aware of an electric surge of mindspeech, well-directed 
along the intimate mode. She could not decipher it; 
but Sukey must have understood it, as well as her gigantic 
consort. 
The background music ceased. A squad of trumpeters, their 

glass carnices hung with banners featuring the male-head motif, 
appeared in the arch of the feasting hall and sounded a fanfare. 
The butterfly swarm of guests paired off and a fuller orchestra 
began to play alla marcia. 
Bryan caught the eye of a human courtier who was opening 
the gate of their enclosure. "Wagner?" 
The gray-torc nodded. "Indubitably, Worthy Doctor. Our 
gracious Lady Eadone wished to make you feel more at home, 
insofar as that's possible. The Tanu are very fond of human 
music. The feasters will also use your own speech-vocal in 
consideration of your torcless status. If you please, your schol-arly 
analysis of our society may begin this very night." 
It began when I came through the damn time-gate, Bryan 
thought. But he only nodded to the man. 
Aiken was asking the gray, "What do we do now, cockie? 
We don't want to commit any fox paws in front of the biggies." 
The courtier said, "The Most Exalted Personages are en-throned 
at their own banqueting table. You'll be presented to 
them briefly, and then the supper will begin. Court etiquette 
is very informal in this society. Just carry on with reasonable 
courtesy." 
They waited until the last of the privileged citizens of Muriah 
had entered the hall, marching two by two. Then it was time 
for their own entrance. 
Aiken swept off his golden hat and made a mocking bow 
to Raimo. "Shall we, dear?" 
"Why the hell not?" laughed the forester. "If this party is 
anything like the last one, the ladies'll be joining us inside!" 
"This party," Aiken said, "is not going to be anything like 
the last one. But you'll have a great time, Ray. I guarantee 
it." 
"How about the rest of us?" Stein asked. He had tucked his.helmet under one arm. He and Sukey fell 
in behind Raimo and 
Aiken. 
"Make your own fun, my man," said Aiken Drum. He 
strutted through the ranks of trumpeters into the hall. 
Wordlessly, Bryan offered his arm to Elizabeth; but all 
thought of the farspeaker and her fate had gone from his mind. 
As they stepped forward to the Tannhauser cadences he felt 
only the stabbing thrust of his fixe: that Mercy would be there! 
There and safe within her silver. Not trapped, not struggling, 
but secure in the faerie family that enraptured the lucky ones 
among its captives. 
Only let her be happy. 
They walked into a great beamed and paneled room that 
was lit by brazen sconces full of honest fire. The sparkling 
little meta lamps were in use, too, but for decoration only, 
studding strange tapestries and metal sculptures along the walls. 
The feasting board made a great inverted U-shape, with the 
several hundred guests ranged along both sides of the lateral 
sections, standing at their places. At the far end of the chamber 
was the local version of the high table—actually somewhat 
lower than the two side boards so that the dignitaries enthroned 
there would be more visible to the guests. The wall behind the 
Exalted Personages had a huge reproduction of the male-head 
motif, crafted of gold and deeply set into a complex mosaic 
of the crystalline meta lights. Draperies of thin metallic fabric 
framed the whole emblem and merged into a canopy above the 
line of twenty thrones. Liveried waiters were poised behind all 
of the guests. The Personages were attended by a double line 
of servitors, much more sumptuously dressed than those who 

waited upon the lower orders. 
Bryan and Elizabeth walked toward the table, past the ranks 
of smiling nobility. The anthropologist tried to be discreet as 
he scanned the throng; but there were such numbers on both 
sides of the room, and far too many of the human women had 
auburn h a i r ... 
"The Worthy Doctor of Anthropology Bryan Grenfell." 
... And then the arbiter bibendi was presenting him, and 
he stepped forward and made his brief obeisance in the usual 
Milieu style, conscious that the people at the High Table were 
craning forward to study him and his female companion with 
an eagerness they had not vouchsafed to the four other hono-rees. 
Court etiquette evidently did not include the introduction.of the Personages to him, but he had 
little curiosity about the glittering figures at the moment. Mercy was not among them. 
Bryan stepped back and Elizabeth, pale and strained-look-ing, 
had her turn last of all. 
"The Most Illustrious Lady Elizabeth Orme, Grand Master 
Far-speaker and Grand Master Redactor of the Galactic Mil-ieu." 
Bloody hell, marveled Bryan. 
The standing guests raised their arms. Astonishingly enough, 
the Exalted Personages got up from their thrones and also joined 
in the salute. The entire assembly gave voice to a threefold hail: 
"Slonshal! Slonshal! Slonshal!" 
Hairs bristled at the back of Bryan's neck. Now that had 
to be a linguistic coincidence. 
The most central of the male Personages gave a small twist-ing 
gesture. From somewhere came a jangling sound, as though 
a chain were being shaken. Silence fell. 
"Let refreshment and fellowship prevail," intoned the male 
Personage. A magnificent physical specimen, he wore a white 
robe, completely unadorned. His long blond hair and flowing 
beard were dressed with exquisite care in braids and tiny thin 
curls. There was a distinct resemblance to the masklike he-raldic 
emblem and Bryan knew that this must be Thagdal, High 
King of the Tanu. 
The tableau broke into a confetti swirl as the guests flung 
themselves into their seats or went dashing about to exchange 
fresh greetings with one another. Human waiters and rama 
servers began loading the tables with food and drink. The six 
honorees were seated on low couches opposite the Exalted 
Personages and all formality went by the board as the Tanu 
aristocrats satisfied their curiosity by asking the time-travelers 
a torrent of questions. 
Bryan found himself addressed by a formidable woman in 
white seated at the right hand of the King. Glorious red hair 
cascaded from beneath a close-fitting hood of golden fabric 
with upstanding jeweled wings. "I am Nontusvel, Mother of 
the Host and wife to the Thagdal. In courtesy I am your Lady, 
Bryan, and I bid you warm welcome to our Many-Colored 
Land and company. Now.. .what's this I see? Confusion in 
you? And perhaps a fear? I would ease that if I might." 
The power of her smiling ur-mothermind was irresistible, 
strumming his memories like an expert lutanist. A dim control 
room high in a chateau tower and a face full of sweet rue..Tears at a troubadour's song. And with 
that chord plucked, 
segue into another of apple blossoms nightingales moon rising 
flesh warmth auburn hair and eyes of the haunted sea so fey. 
And then the dissonant arpeggio. But where Gaston where's 
she gone where through the damn time-portal into Exile. Here 
I go Monsieur le Chat into the deep cellar... 
Bryan's festive costume had inner pockets. Without voli-tion, 

he reached a hand into the one over his breast and handed 
the durofilm to Queen Nontusvel. She gazed at Mercy's por-trait. 
"You followed her here, Bryan." 
"Yes." I did but see her passing by. Till I die I see her. 
Nontusvel's metapsychic tendrils came weaving solace and 
diversion. "But your Mercy is safe, Bryan! Successfully in-tegrated 
into our fellowship. And so happy! It was as though 
she had been born for the torc. As though she yearned uncon-sciously 
to belong to us and searched us out over the gap of 
six million years." 
The Queen's eyes were as bright as sapphires, shining with 
an inner light, for all that they seemed to have no pupils. 
"May I visit her?" he asked humbly. 
"She is in Goriah, in that region you would call Brittany. 
But she will soon return to our City of the White Silver Plain 
and then you shall hear her tell of her life among us. And in 
return for this reunion, will you serve us willingly? Will you 
help us to gain the knowledge that we require, the insight that 
may be vital to our survival as a race?" 
"I will do as I can, Exalted Lady. My training has been in 
the analysis of cultures and the evaluation of intercultural im-pact 
and the attendant stresses. I admit that I don't understand 
completely what you want of me, but I'm at your disposal." 
Nontusvel nodded her winged golden head and smiled. The 
High King turned from Elizabeth and said to the anthropologist, 
"My dear son Ogmol will help you coordinate your researches. 
See him? That high-spirited fellow at the righthand table in the 
turquoise-and-silver robe, balancing the wine ewer on his head, 
the silly twit. There! Now he's done i t ... Well, even a scholar 
has a right to celebrate. You'll see his more serious side to-morrow. 
He'll be your guide. Your assistant, damme! And 
between the two of you, you'll make sense out of our conun-drum 
before the Great Combat convenes or I'm a no-ball son 
of a Howler mule!" 
He guffawed hugely and Bryan, overawed, could only think.of a particular virile Ghost of Christmas 
Present he had seen 
as a child on the Tri-D. 
"If I may ask, King Thagdal—what is the basis for your 
sovereignty?" 
Both Thagdal and Nontusvel laughed uproariously, the King 
to the point of coughing. Whereupon the Queen took up a great 
golden cup and soothed her husband with a draft of honey-wine. 
When the King was restored, he said, "I like that, Bryan! 
Begin at the top with the authority figures. And begin now! 
Well, it's simple enough, lad. I've got stupendous metafunc-tions, 
of course, and I'm a wiz in battle. But my most valued 
attribute is—fertility! More than half of the people in this hall 
are my children and grandchildren and great-grandchildren. 
And that's not to count the absent loved ones—eh, Nonnie?" 
The Queen simpered discreetly. She told Bryan, "My Lord 
Husband is the father of eleven thousand and fifty-eight—and 
never a Firvulag and never a black-torc among them. His germ 
plasm is without peer, and for this reason he is our High King." 
Bryan tried to phrase his next inquiry tactfully. "And you, 
Noble Lady, have a similarly distinguished reproductive his-tory?" 
"Two hundred and forty-two children!" trumpeted Thagdal. 
"A record among the royal spouses. And among them such 
many-talented luminaries as Nodonn and Velteyn and Imidol 
and Culluket! And the Exalted Ladies Riganone and Clana and 
Dectar—to say nothing of dear Anear! None of my other wives, 
not even the lamented Lady Boanda, brought forth such riches." 

And now Elizabeth entered the colloquy, saying softly, 
"Bryan—be sure to have His Majesty tell you about the other 
mothers of his children." 
"Simple enough." Thagdal beamed. "Share the wealth! 
Propagate the optimal phenotype, as Crazy Greggy would say. 
Every gold and silver lady gets a whirl with the Old Man first 
time around." 
Elizabeth said, "And after they're impregnated by the King, 
they may become the wives or mistresses of other Tanu nobles 
and have children by others. Isn't that interesting?" 
"Very," Bryan said faintly. "But this—uh—genetic plan 
could not have been in force from the beginning of your race's 
residence on the planet Earth." 
Thagdal stroked his beard. His bushy blond brows came 
together. "No-o-o. Things were a little different back in the 
beginning—in the Dark Ages, so to speak. There weren't too.many of us then, and I had to fight for 
my Kingly rights if the 
lady wasn't willing. But of course I won most of the time, 
because in those days I was the best swordsman in more ways than one. You understand?" 
Bryan said, "There was a similar custom during the ancient 
day of our Earth. It was called the droit du seigneur." 
"Right! Right! I recall one of the dear little gorfie silvers mentioning it. Where was I ?... Yes, 
the history thing! Well, 
with the opening of the time-gate and the coming of you people from the future, we tried to 
organize the propagation of the 
race more scientifically. Some of your folks were a great help along those lines. You must be sure 
to meet them, Bryan. I'd 
say they rank as near-godparents of the glorious Tanu fellow- ship you see here today! Dear old 
Crazy Greggy, of course— Lord Greg-Donnet, that is, our Eugenics and Genetics Master. 
And that marvelous woman, Anastasya-Bybar! Where the hell 
would we be if Tasha hadn't shown our decadent reprotech- nicians how to reverse the sterilization 
of human women? Why— 
all of those precious latent ova would have been lost to us!" 
He dug an elbow into Nontusvel's junoesque torso. "And half my fun is persevering until I get that 
little bun safely into the 
oven—eh, Nonnie?" 
The Queen simpered. Bryan took an overlarge swallow of wine. He was conscious 
of Elizabeth's eyes on him. "And so—and so approximately seventy years ago, when the first timetravelers 
began to arrive, 
you started to hybridize with humans?" 
"Get it straight, son. Only the human males contributed to 
the gene pool at first. Tasha didn't come through until— when?—say, ten years after the gate 
opened. Our ladies had their fun, of course, in those early years. And it didn't take 
long for us to discover that human-Tanu hybrids were less likely to go Firvulag—and more likely to 
be carried to term by our 
delicate little mothers.. .saving your presence, Nonnie love! Even our numbwit Tanu geneticists 
noticed that. Aluteyn and 
his people were on the lookout for someone like Academician 
Anastasya Astaurova. And sure enough—Compassionate Tana sent her to us with bells on! Literally." 
Thagdal indulged in another fit of jollity, quenching it with 
heroic drafts of wine. All around the feasting hall, spirits were rising as cups were drained and 
refilled. The supper consisted 
mostly of meat dishes in bewildering variety, together with 
great platters of fruit, and breadrolls baked in odd shapes..Entertainers, announced by the 
arbiter bibendi, did their turns in the middle of the U of tables, and the guests responded with 
showers of small coins or half-chewed bones, according to the quality of the talent displayed. The 
Exalted Personages supped 
in a more refined fashion; but down near one end of the High 
Table, where Aiken was seated opposite two nobles attired in 
rose and gold, there was a good deal of rowdy laughter and cupthumping going on. 
The Queen said, "Tell dear Bryan about our gift of the torcs, Thaggy." 

"Tell us both," Elizabeth said, with her most Mona Lisa smile. 
The King wagged a finger at the farspeaker. "Barriers still up, little love? That'll never do, you 
know. Honey-wine is 
what you need. Is there anything else I can tempt you with?" 
Nontusvel covered her mouth and spluttered with stately mirth. 
"Your Majesty is a most gracious host." Elizabeth raised 
her goblet to him. "Please continue your fascinating history." "Where was I ?.. Torcs for the 
humans! Well, you have 
to understand that true fellowship between us Tanu and you 
people wasn't something that could spring up full-grown in a year or two. There was the genetic 
compatibility, with advan-tages 
that were manifest but not well understood. We bestowed honorary golden torcs on Greggy and Tasha 
in gratitude for 
their efforts. They weren't latents, as it turned out, and not all that psychoadaptive, either. 
And then Iskender-Kernonn came 
through and domesticated the animals and we gave him an 
honorary torc." 
"Poor dear Isky," the Queen lamented, emptying her goblet. A waiter filled it immediately. 
"Snatched from us by the Fir-vulag 
and their bestial coterie of Lowlives!" 
"And then about forty years ago Eusebio came through and did such brilliant work improving the 
rama torcs—being a psychobiologist back in the Milieu and the first person who 
seemed to understand the theory behind the torcs. So we gave 
him a gold, too, and named him Gomnol. And damned if the man didn't turn out to be a superlative 
latent coercer, for all that he's an ugly little runt! What a shock for us!" 
"You hadn't known about the human metapsychic latency factor before?" Elizabeth asked. 
"We are an old, old race," the Queen admitted, "afflicted with a certain scientific languor." A 
tear stole from one sapphire.eye and trickled down her flawless cheek, splashing into the 
cushioned depths of her corsage. She took consolation from the cup. "As Nonnie says," the King 
resumed, "we're an ancient race. Rather decadent in certain disciplines, I fear. And our own small 
faction—which as you may know fled our home 
galaxy under duress—was even less scientifically inclined than 
the common ruck of Tanu... No, except for Brede (who doesn't 
really count), we didn't understand how the torcs worked to make our own metafunctions operant, 
and we didn't try very hard to understand the powers themselves. They were there, if you follow 
me. We didn't worry overmuch about the whys 
and wherefores, so human latency came as a complete surprise. As Gomnol pointed out, you humans 
didn't know your own 
minds and bodies for ninety-nine pip niner per centum of your 
racial history, either! So don't sneer at us. Where was I ?... Oh, yes. Latent humans. Well, when 
Gomnol got his golden torc and went meta, he connected the whole thing in a flash. The Tanu are 
latents and so are normal humans—some more, but most very much less, even to the point of nullity. 
In your future world, the babies that are potential operants are detected and 
later trained up by farsensing and redactive practitioners such 
as this Illustrious Lady." He gave a courtly nod to Elizabeth. 
"Since no operants came through the time-portal in those days, 
and since our torc-enhanced powers are shaky in detecting 
human latents, Gomnol decided that we must make ourselves 
a mechanical device for mental assay of the human population. 
He worked out the gadget that tested you folks back at Castle Gateway. We have others at our 
principal cities to catch the 
latents that elude us because of mental turmoil during the initial 
testing. There are a fair number of slip-throughs." He scowled 
thunderously. "Including one that was an unmitigated disaster! Where was I ?... Gomnol's 
brainstorm! Understand now—this chap is an inspired psychobiologist. He knew it would be dangerous 
to put gold torcs on human latents who weren't whole- heartedly assimilated into our 
fellowship." "There are always," the Queen interposed darkly, "in- grates." 
"So Gomnol conceived the silver torcs, with their built-in psychoregulators. And shortly after 
that, the gray torcs—to be used by so-called nonlatent humans who could stand very low- level 
metapsychic involvement. A whole new world of fellow- ship was born! Beginning in Gomnol's time, 
when it became.possible to mass-produce the gray torcs—well, produce them with relative speed, at 

any rate—we of the Tanu were able to 
seize the ascendancy on this world. The vile Firvulag, those 
shadow-siblings of ours, were no longer able to contend with 
us on a virtually equal footing. We had armies of loyal human 
grays to crush their superior numbers! We had human mothers 
to counter the vulgar fecundity of their coarse little women! 
We had the noble silvers—our operant allies-mental! And as 
time went on, many of the silvers were advanced to full citi-zenship 
and given gold." 
This can be done without psychic injury torcexchange? 
Certainly cherished Elizabeth silvertorc removed without 
danger after gold in place. 
"And think! The brilliant gray technicians have improved 
our economy by devising more efficient means of transport and 
goods production! Thanks to the mourned Lord of Animals, 
Kernonn, we have beasts to ride and beasts to haul and beasts 
to guard us from Firvulag depredation. And perhaps best of 
a l l ... we have hybrid human champions in the Grand Combat." 
The King paused. He leaned across the table, upsetting his cup 
in the process, and took one of Elizabeth's hands. 
"And now, Tana's bounty surpasses itself. She has sent us 
you." 
Queen Nontusvel seemed to radiate a lunar benevolence. 
There was a different glow in the deep green eyes of Thagdal. 
Impervious and calm, Elizabeth repeated, "And now Tana 
has sent me. But in our own world, the gifts of God are often 
ambiguously given. You don't yet see me as I am, King Thag-dal." 
"But that will come, dearest Elizabeth! You shall go to the 
most noble of us all for your initiation into our ways—to the 
Prescient Lady Brede Shipspouse, she of the Two Faces and 
the poetry. Brede will teach you and you will teach her. And 
in good time you will go to Tasha-Bybar and then you will 
come to me. Dearest Elizabeth." 
"Dearest Elizabeth," came Nontusvel's echo. Surely it was as full of goodwill as it had ever been. 
"A toast!" bellowed Thagdal, leaping to his feet. His cup 
had been speedily righted and replenished. 
"A toast!" the several hundred guests shouted back. The 
arbiter shook the chain of silence. 
"To the Tanu race and the human race! In fellowship, in communion, in love!".The feasters raised 
their great golden goblets. "Fellowship! 
Communion! Love!" 
"With an emphasis on the latter!" called out Aiken Drum. 
There was laughter and shouting and a great swallowing 
and spilling of wine, with many a soggy embrace and a sipping 
from lip to lip. The royal couple, inflamed by the drink and 
festivity, now clung to each other murmuring and snorting. A 
corps de ballet of human women and men, dressed alike in 
bold magpie leotards, appeared as music struck up and began 
to lead the throng in elaborate contredanse patterns. 
Elizabeth whispered to Bryan, "I'm going to have to leave 
you for a while. I must look into them while their inhibitions 
are down. If you like, I'll share the data with you later." She 
gave him a solemn moue, then closed her eyes and withdrew 
to some mental vantage point. 
One of the female black-and-whiters tried to haul Bryan off 
his bench into the dance, where Aiken and Raimo were already 
whirling and leaping as though they had been doing the complex 
steps all their lives. Bryan shook his head to the invitation. He 
let the waiters fill his great cup again and again and tried to 
blot from his mind the realization of how it must be now with 
Mercy. When he finally thought to examine the cup closely and 

discovered what the gold and jewels ensheathed, he was too 
drunk to care..3 
STEINIE DON'T DANCE WITH THEM DON'T. LOOK WHAT THEY do to Raimo my God. 
Allright allright littleone calm keep on hiding the two of us don't give way don't fear. 
They are stronger especially this DionketLordHealer I could never keep him out of us without 
Elizabethhelp. They don't 
like that friendshipwall but afraid offend her too early. O Jesus. 
That beautybitchslut Anear taking Raimo right there middlemob shame disgust fury hate... Steinie! 
Calm calm shelterlove armsword bless Elizabeth. Atleast 
they no make Aiken dance their tune vice versa if anything. Not toy like Raimobooby. 
Nor I Sukeylove if you help. 
"Are you sure you won't take a turn with the dancers?" The 
Lady Riganone smiled at Stein and Sukey. The magpies were back importuning them. "Your two friends 
are having a mar-velous 
time." 
"No thank you, Lady," Stein said. The magpies minced away with reluctance. 
Sukey helped herself to another of the spiced tournedos. "These are delicious, Lord Dionket." She 
spoke shyly to the 
deep-eyed Chief Healer, who sat opposite her. "Are they made from venison?" 
"Why, no, Little Sister. Hipparion." 
"Those adorable little horses?" Sukey cried in dismay. Lady Riganone tossed her head and laughed 
merrily. The pendants dangling from wires on her lavender and gold head-dress 
clashed and pealed. "What else would we do with them? 
They're the most abundant meat source that we have—and the 
Goddess be thanked they're so delicious. Why—do you realize.that those poor people up in the 
Hercynian Forest, in Finiah 
and those other places at the end of the world, must make do 
with pigs and tough old stags and even mastodons? We south-erners 
are so lucky. There's really nothing to compare with a 
roast loin of hipparion, seasoned with garlic and a hint of thyme 
and perhaps a little of that new pepper, all brown and crackling 
on the outside and oozing blood within." 
"Don't be squeamish, Sukey," Stein told her, dipping out 
another helping from a bowl of rich stew. "When in Rome, 
you know! I don't know what this is, but it's sure got flavor." 
Dionket poked a bony finger into the deep silver dish, then 
sucked meditatively. "Mmm... a promephitis ragout, dear 
warrior. I believe the Elder Earth equivalent for the little crea-ture 
would be—" 
The mental picture flashed before Stein and Sukey. 
"Skunk!" The Viking choked. 
"Oh—there, there, Steinie," Lady Riganone exclaimed, ra-diating 
solicitude. "Did something go down the wrong pipe? 
Do take some wine for that coughing." 
The Personage seated next to Dionket, a burly giant in a 
short jerkin of blue and gold, said, "Try some of these hedge-hogs 
in burgundy to settle your tripes, Stein. Now there's a 
dish to make your belly take notice! And you know what they 
•ay about hedgehog." He leered and the mental image of the 
prickly pun was distressingly overstated. 
Coolly, Sukey shoved the platter of odd little dainties far 
out of Stein's reach. "The warrior is recovering from an injury, 
Lord Imidol. He mustn't overindulge. In anything." 
Lady Riganone's fluting chuckles and her chapeau tinkled 
together. "Isn't she marvelous, Dionket? She'll be such an asset 
to your Guild of Redactors. But it was really very naughty of 
you to have reserved her from the bidding." 
Mindsnap. 
"What do you mean, Lady?" Stein asked. 
"Have some more cherry brandy," the President of the Re-dactors 
urged. "Or would you prefer plum or raspberry?" He 

fingered his torc. Both Stein and Sukey were compelled to 
relax. 
I couldn't help it Steinie he slipped through. O Elizabeth 
come back from there and help us before Stein finds out I won't 
be able to hold him! 
Sukeywoman whatwhatWHAT dammit?.Steinie stop I can barely cover you if they perceive allthat 
inside they'll hurt you love O please calmrecedeflattentran-quilize. 
Damn you ElizaMasterbeth come back from there! 
Out in the middle of the floor, the arbiter bibendi was hold-ing 
a length of glittering glass chain above his head and shaking 
it. The riotous dancing calmed and the music drained away. 
Revelers drifted back to their seats. Four Tanu ladies all but 
dragged the disheveled Raimo with them. Aiken Drum suffered 
no such indignity. He strutted back to his place at the High 
Table and sat carefully on the edge of his couch. 
"Exalted Personages, most noble lords and ladies, and il-lustrious 
honorees!" cried the arbiter. "Pray silence! It is the 
hour for the contributions of the honored guests!" 
Cheers, cup-thumping, and a clatter of knives upon golden 
plates. 
The aribter shook the chain again. "Two of our guests"— 
the silver-torced exquisite bowed toward Bryan and Eliza-beth—" 
are exempted from show by command of Their Awful 
Majesties. And one other"—he pointed at Raimo—"has al-ready 
made his talents known!" 
The ladies at the low tables screamed with laughter. A 
number of them began pelting Raimo with bananas, stopping 
reluctantly as the chain of silence rang once again. 
"We will hear from Sue-Gwen Davies!" 
Sukey felt herself impelled toward the center of the room. 
The soul within her was turned over and over helplessly by the 
examining psyches of the King and Queen and the other Per-sonages. 
The Tanu were surprised at the deep barrier (for Eliz-abeth 
had returned to assist in the nick of time), but were 
disposed to be satisfied with the superficial revelations that 
were accessible to them. Dionket's mind spoke. 
Dear little RedactorSister, apprentice comforthealer! Lend 
us a small solace this night sing of ElderEarth of ancient par-entland. 
Sukey's apprehension began to melt. Other minds all around 
her seemed to beg: Lull us. 
Keeping her gaze on Stein, she sang a cradlesong in a small 
clear voice, first in Welsh and then in Standard English. After 
the first phrase, a single harpist accompanied her. 
Holl amrantau'r ser ddywedant, 
Ar hyd y nos. 
Dyma'r ffordd i fro gogoniant,.Ar hyd y nos. 
Golau arall yw tywyllwch, 
I arddangos gwir brydferthwch, 
Teulu'r nefoedd mewn tawelwch, 
Ar hyd y nos. 
Love, fear not if sad your dreaming, All through the night. 
In the mist bright stars are gleaming. 
All through the night. 
Joy will come to us at morning, 
Life with sunrise hope adorning, 
Though sad dreams may give dread warning. All through the night. 
Behind the words and music glowed the sheltering love of 
the caregiver. Her healing energy poured over the manchild to 
whom she had given rebirth, overflowed and spread in a great 
psychic pool throughout the hall. For a moment, the lullaby's 
softness quenched all the others' anxieties, soothed anger and 

lust, diminished grief and frenzy. 
When the song was done the banqueters were silent. And 
then on an alien level of consciousness, which the torced hu-mans 
could sense but not decipher, came a burst of declaration 
from many Tanu minds. It was cut off in full spate by the lofty 
voice of Dionket. The Lord Healer rose from his place at the 
High Table and held out his arms, forming a living tau of 
crimson and silver. 
Mine. Reserved. 
Sukey returned to her place, dazed, and sat down beside 
her husband. The arbiter bibendi shook his chain. 
"We will know the talents of Stein Oleson." 
It was the Viking's turn to be drawn irresistibly from his 
seat. He stood with his head uncovered and glared at the exotic 
nobility lounging at the High Table, feeling their minds come 
tapping, prying, snooping. And the Queen's motherthought, 
more compassionate: 
He should not have been torced alas the briefliving! 
And then the King: Suffice unto the Combat. Skillplay! 
Two of the magpie dancemasters came bounding from the 
sidelines, carrying metal baskets full of fruit resembling large 
oranges. One pitched a bright globe overhand and it flew at 
Stein's head..The bronze sword hissed from it scabbard, gripped in both 
the giant's hands. He smote the fruit neatly in two. 
King Thagdal roared with jovian delight. The men in black and white began flinging oranges at 
Stein as fast as they could. His sword flashed like a golden wheel. He spun and leaped, 
chopping the flying spheres to bits. The King pounded the table 
while tears of mirth ran into his splendid beard. The company 
of Tanu screeched and cheered. The chain of silence sounded. 
The arbiter gushed, "Oh, a fair show indeed by our newest 
warrior! Well done, Stein!" 
Bid. 
Again the burst of exotic mindspeech. This time Elizabeth 
was attuned to it. Without surprise, she heard Stein being auc-tioned 
off to the highest bidder as a likely gladiator in a contest 
called the Low Melee. Since the ex-driller was one of the most 
impressive physical specimens to have appeared in Exile within 
the past decade, the sports-crazed exotics drove the bidding to 
what was evidently an unprecedented level. They were bidding 
their personal services to the Crown—nominal owner of all 
exceptional time-travelers—offering their metafunctions, their 
material wealth, their torced and untorced human subjects. 
Three hundred grays for the Royal Guard! 
My garnet mine in the Pyrenees! 
The renowned dancing woman Kanda-Kanda and all of her 
suite! 
A hundred racing chalikos caparisoned in gold! 
The death of Delbaeth. 
The King cried aloud, "Hold!" He rose from his couch and 
glowered over the startled assemblage. Out in the middle of 
the floor, Stein stood still, the point of his great sword resting 
on the tiles. 
"What person has dared this bid?" asked Thagdal with silken 
softness. "Who esteems the strength of this warrior so highly 
that he will rashly pledge the destruction of the Shape of Fire?" 
The crowd of banqueters held their tongues and minds. 
"I do," said Aiken Drum. 
There was a collective sigh, and a collective lancing out, 
and a mental gasp of stunned surprise as all of the mind-probes 
fell blunted. Thagdal began to laugh aloud and after a moment, 
so did Nontusvel and then all of the others. Reaction to the 

enormity rocked the hall..Elizabeth came sliding into Aiken on the uniquely human 
mode. 
What in the world? 
Look Thaggymind yourself Elizababe fondest wish extir-pation 
meanie FirvulagDelbaethShapeofFire. So bid. 
For Steinie? Deranged clownAiken gaming with ourfriend's 
life?! 
Elizadummybeth! I'd save Steinbuddyvulnerable. Tanu 
combatschool ferocitymindset recharge berserkerpsychoenergy 
irrevocably. 
Damn ... yes. I affirm. 
Safe with me. Eventually get Sukey too. TurdflockTanu 
really bit it off when torced me. You know. 
Suspected. But damn they get you if comdown mindunion 
crunch. Get us both if they decipher operant snuff sequence. 
Distract distract distract. 
The mental exchange between Aiken and Elizabeth had oc-cupied 
a fraction of a second. The arbiter bibendi was franti-cally 
jangling the chain of silence as the prankster in the shining 
suit strolled from his place at the High Table to a position 
beside Stein. When the tumult died away, the King said, "Speak, 
Aiken Drum." 
The little man swept off his hat and bowed. Then he began 
to talk; and as he spoke aloud his mind played a subtle descant 
that somehow gave his ludicrous words credence, painting them 
with a mesmeric plausibility that disarmed even the most skep-tical 
of the exotic audience. 
"Now I know that my bidding has surprised you, friends! For not only is the deed itself an 
impudent thing, but you 
scarcely can understand how I know enough of the horrid Del-baeth 
to suggest his removal. It seems incredible to you, doesn't 
it, that a newly arrived little silver-torc can propose to do what 
so many of your own champions have failed of. 
"Well, let me tell you how things are! I'm a different kind of human! You've never seen my like. 
Now, this big fellow 
who stands beside me is my friend. And I fear that the Good Queen is right in saying that he's not 
the kind who can wear 
your gray torc long and live. The coaching style of your fighting-school 
would undo all the redaction done by the little Sue-Gwen 
and the Lady Elizabeth to restore his sanity. And to save 
Stein, I'd take him from you. But not without offering a fair 
price in return. 
"Now you've been probing me and pinching me and trying.to peek inside me while I speak. And you've 
failed! Even King Thagdal has failed. Even Elizabeth can no longer probe me! 
And so you'd better know that the torc put on me at Castle 
Gateway set off a mental chain reaction that's still going on. 
I scared your Lord Creyn and I'm scaring you now. But don't 
fash yourselves! I don't fancy doing you any harm. In fact, I 
like almost all I see of this world, and the more I grow within, 
the better things seem to portend for all of us together. So wait 
until I have my say before you give in to the fear and try to 
swat me! First see how I can help you become even greater 
than before! 
"Now, Delbaeth. I saw his Shape of Fire deep inside the 
Thagdal's mind. I was curious, and I studied it as we ate and 
drank and amused ourselves. And when the bidding started, I 
said to myself: Why not? And so I bid my services, following 
your own custom. I'm confident that I can exterminate this 
Firvulag menace. So I leave it up to all of you, friends-mental. 
And you, High King of the Tanu! I'll open myself for just a 
moment and let you look at what's growing in my skull. Then 

decide whether you want to treat me as a fellow mind-jouster, 
or as a slave ..." 
He expanded to them all and they went rushing in. 
Elizabeth flowed over and around and through the exotics, 
rating an ironic acknowledgement from Aiken for her skill. 
The Tanu stumbled through incandescence, hardly aware of 
what the burgeoning mental sprouts showed promise of be-coming. 
But Elizabeth knew. 
Milieu well shot of you Aikenboy. 
Pooh lass see how they run fewkin' psychelliptical blind-mice. 
No... one of them knows. See there? 
Hah! Yes!... Who you anyhoo oldwomanmind? 
I am Mayvar. I have been waiting for the likes of you since 
the coming of the Ship. I am ancient and I am ugly and I lead 
the Guild of Farsensors. Come freely to me for your initiation 
and it shall all be as you hope. Unless you are afraid... 
The chain of silence clanged. The Great Ones and all of the 
piddling, timorous inspectors went fleeing out of Aiken. He 
politely waited while Elizabeth and Mayvar withdrew, before 
slamming down the barrier once more. 
"Shall we allow him?" roared King Thagdal. 
"Slonshal!" the assembly responded.."Shall we send him to the test, and shall the boldest of us 
witness his victory or destruction?" 
"Slonshal!" 
The King's voice fell to the threshold of audibility. "And 
who among us will dare to take him to kin and teach him our 
way, this perilously shining youth?" 
Far down at the left end of the High Table a wand-thin 
figure arose. She came into the center of the hall leaning on a 
tall golden staff. Her gown was of a purple so deep as to be almost black, powdered with gold 
stars, and having a hood 
that concealed her hair but let the amazing ugliness of her 
features be fully revealed to the two humans waiting for her. 
"Mayvar Kingmaker will take him to kin," said the crone. 
"I'll see him to his gold and if he's kind, to more! Will you 
come with me, bright laddie? And will you bring your friend 
to learn the battlecompany's way, before the two of you to-gether 
dare Delbaeth?" 
"Stein!" cried Sukey. 
The hag laughed. Her mind spoke to Aiken in the intimate 
mode. 
Countercustom though it be I'll see that he alone has her if 
you fill your boast. Dionket and I are allied. Now are you 
coming? 
The little man in the suit of gold extended both arms to the 
tall old Tanu woman. She bent to him and they kissed. Then 
they walked together from the hall, with Stein following as if 
in a dream a few paces behind. The arbiter bibendi gave a 
frantic signal and the musicians struck up a spirited dance tune. 
The magpies came cavorting to draw the stunned guests out 
onto the floor by sheer force. 
At the High Table, Thagdal watched the strange trio leave 
through the door at the opposite end of the room. He had not 
moved so much as a muscle since the woman in purple had 
risen from the table. But then the opaque green eyes returned 
to life. Thagdal smiled and raised his cup and so did the re-maining 
Exalted Personages occupying the thrones that flanked 
his. 
"Shall we give Aiken Drum slonshal?" the King asked softly. 
"Or shall we wait a bit to see whether or not the Venerable 
Lady Mayvar has chosen rightly?" 

His goblet tipped. Raspberry liquor poured onto the polished 
tabletop like fresh blood. Thagdal inverted his cup in the midst.of the puddle, lurched to his 
feet, and vanished through a door concealed by draperies. The Queen hastened after him. Sukey came 
to Elizabeth, mindweeping but with dry eyes. 
"What's happened? I don't understand. Why have Stein and 
Aiken gone with that old woman?" Patience little Mindsister I'll explain— 
"Kingmaker!" Bryan peered owlishly at the two human 
women, then raised his own jewel-eyed golden skull goblet 
with an unsteady hand. "Mayvar Kingmaker, Creyn called her! 
Bloody damn legend. Bloody damn world. Slonshal! Long live 
the King!" 
He tilted the dregs down his throat and fell prone onto the 
table. "I think," said Elizabeth, "that the party is over.".4 
QUEEN NONTUSVEL AND THREE OF HER CHILDREN WALKED IN 
the garden before noon, while it was still cool, and if the royal 
lady was apprehensive, she kept her fear well veiled. 
The Queen plucked a coral-colored blossom from a honey-suckle 
and held it out with an invitational thought. A hum-mingbird 
came, its feathers flashing iridescent blue and green 
when it darted through sunbeams. It drank nectar and suffered 
the Queen to tickle its avian brain. When it was done it hovered 
for a moment before her face, buzzing, and then whisked away 
into the lemon tree. 
"Those things are vicious, Mother," Imidol said. "They'll 
go for your eyes if they catch even a hint of threat. We should 
never have allowed them out of the aviary." 
"But I love them," the Queen said, laughing as she tossed 
away the drained flower. "And they know it. They would never 
try to hurt me." This morning she was wearing a soft blue 
robe. Her flame-colored hair was bound into a braided diadem. 
"You're too trusting," Culluket said. And there it was, the 
opening wedge the other two had been waiting for. 
Imidol, the youngest and most aggressive, rushed in with 
all the natural force of the metacoercive. "Even creatures that 
appear to be harmless can be dangerous. Consider human 
women! When they're cornered, when they're confronted with 
multiple psychic shocks, they may strike out rather than subside 
into the complaisant mode we've come to expect from them." 
"This new operant one could be a serious menace," Ri-ganone 
cautioned. 
Culluket took his mother's arm as they came to a wide flight 
of rustic steps that led to a grassy area fully enclosed by flow-.ering shrubs. A small marble 
pavilion stood in the center of 
the lawn. 
"Let's sit here for a moment, Mother. We must speak of 
this. It can't be postponed." 
"I suppose not." Nontusvel sighed. Culluket was smiling 
his reassurance and she radiated affection in return. Of these 
three grown children, he resembled her the most physically, 
having the same wide-set sapphire eyes and high brow. But in 
spite of his beauty and his great redactive skill, members of 
the Host rarely sought him out for the healing, even though he 
was their brother. Was it true, what the others said, that Cul-luket 
was too zealous in his scrutiny of pain? 
Nontusvel said, "Surely we have the resources among the 
Host to control this Elizabeth—for all her torcless power. When 
she sees more of our ways, she will surely unite with us. It's 
only reasonable." 
O Mother misapprehend! Woe. 
Screen up Cull? Listeners! 
Upfast. Imi shunt those gardeners away. Riga show her. 

"You mustn't whisper behind my mind," the Queen chided 
them. "This mental jumble—! I taught you better, dear ones. 
Now, an orderly disquisition, if you please." 
Riganone the farsensor rose from the marble bench and 
paced back and forth, tall and mauve, without meeting her 
mother's mind in the intimate mode. 
"Early this morning, as I had planned, I observed the awak-ening 
of the woman Elizabeth. I knew that her screens would 
be misty in half-sleep and hoped that I would be able to pen-etrate 
her deeply and without trace during the few moments 
that she was vulnerable. I undertook the task, rather than Cul-luket, 
because my combination of farsensing and redactive 
faculties is perhaps most congruous to Elizabeth's own, and 
thus least likely to be detected by h e r ... I believe that I suc-ceeded. 
I observed her reactions to the events that took place 
at the supper last night, as well is her later response to the 
removal of her hot-air balloon and other survival gear from her 
chambers. As to the first: She views our simple culture with 
condescension and disdain. She finds our manners barbarous, 
our mental patterns adolescent, and our sexual mores incom-patible 
with the ritual monogamy and sublimation fostered among 
the metapsychic elite of her Milieu. She despises us. She will 
never willingly integrate. She rejects and abominates the role 
of royal consort. There was something deep within her moti-.vation that I was unable to con, but 
the fact of her resolution 
was clear and immutable. She will never submit to the new 
genetic scheme hatched by Gomnol. As to our abstraction of 
her escape gear—she still hopes to flee from Muriah in some 
manner and become a Lowlife." 
Relief gratification! "But, my dears! We couldn't ask for a 
better outcome! My greatest anxiety was that she should aspire 
to be queen." And I ... come at last to share the fate of Boanda 
and Anear-Ia. 
Never! cried the three sibling minds. 
The Queen expanded to embrace them: Dearest children 
flowers of my Host. 
Culluket said aloud, "Nevertheless, we mustn't delude our-selves. 
Even without ambition, Elizabeth menaces our dynasty. 
I have been farspeaking to Nodonn in Goriah and he agrees. 
As matters now stand, our noble brother is the obvious heir to 
the Thagdal even in spite of his flaw—and we shall amplify 
our power beneath Nodonn's aegis. But we could not hope to 
prevail against a line of operant metapsychics of the type that 
Elizabeth and the Thagdal would engender. You can be sure 
that Gomnol is quite aware of this." 
The redactor projected two genetic diagrams. "The first 
shows the offspring if Elizabeth is homozygous. Greg-Donnet 
says that metapsychic operancy is an autosomal dominant with 
full penetrance." 
"All of the children will be operant!" Nontusvel exclaimed 
in dismay. 
Culluket continued. "The second diagram assumes Elizabeth 
has only a single allele for operancy. Half the offspring would 
then be operant. Inbreed the operants of the first generation, 
and the next yields three operants out of four. Continue the 
consanguineous matings, and you have a rival host of torcless 
metapsychics ready to oppose us in the third generation!" 
Riganone's mind queried: Incest? 
Culluket showed his sister a bleak smile. "The scheme is 
Gomnol's. He is hardly one to scruple at our Tanu taboos. And 
the Thagdal grows old and ever more subject to the filthy 

Coercer Lord's human wiles." 
The four minds paused to reprise the old infamy. A human 
upstart as President of the Coercer Guild! Poor old Leyr hadn't 
had a chance against him. 
"A good thing the wretch is sterile." Young Imidol's hatred.was vividly displayed. "Gomnol would 
go for Elizabeth him-self! 
Defiler of our sacred blue and gold!" 
We depart from the immediate matter Brother. 
"Culluket is right," said the Queen. "But what are we to do 
with Elizabeth?" 
Visions: A red balloon soaring eastward from Aven, over 
the Deep Lagoon to the long isle of Kersic... A sailing craft 
manned by Highjohn, or even by the woman herself, fleeing 
south to Africa... A furtive figure in a red jumpsuit making 
its way westward on foot along the high spine of the Aven 
Peninsula, guided by ramas into the wilderness of Iberia... 
Consequents: The balloon swiftly spied out and pursued by 
flying psychokinetics loyal to the King rather than to the Host. 
The escaping boat retrieved with even greater ease by the same 
PK adepts, the sails of their cutters filled by mind-conjured 
gales. The woman fleeing on foot presenting a knottier prob-lem— 
and how far could she go with the entire countryside 
aroused, and four hundred kilometers to travel before reaching 
the mainland of Spain? She would have to skirt the large city 
of Afaliah at the peninsula's base, escape its Hunt and plan-tation 
security forces. Still, if she did reach the Catalan Wil-derness 
... 
"She would be out of the Thagdal's reach and out of ours," 
Culluket said, "but subject to capture by the Firvulag or even 
the heretic Minanonn. And this last, I submit, would be an 
even greater calamity than the one facing us now." 
The Queen's kindly heart shrank from the next question. 
"What is the solution, then?" 
"She must be put to death," said Imidol. "It is the only way. 
And not only her mind but her body destroyed, so there is no 
hope of Gomnol utilizing her ova in his obscene contraptions." 
Little olive-and-black finches warbled in the lemon trees. 
The breeze from the Mount of Heroes above Muriah was dying 
now and it was getting very hot. The Queen extended a ringed 
finger toward a tiny spider that was lowering itself from the 
rafters of the pavilion. Its web floated as in an unfelt wind, 
bringing the creature to a landing on Nontusvel's fingernail. 
She watched it stand there, combing the air with its front legs, 
its sparky predator's mind sniffing. 
"It may not be easy," she said. "We know little of the 
offensive capability of such a one. If we sent her far away, 
she would not desire to return. She would be grateful to us 
rather than perhaps doing us great harm.".The spider began a wary descent from the Queen's finger. 
She sent it sailing safely to the branch of a remontant shrub 
rose. Eat the aphis, little hunterkiller, so that the roses may 
thrive. 
Culluket said, "Elizabeth is strong only in farsensing and redaction. Her other metafaculties are 
negligible. She cannot 
spin concrete illusions nor conjure up psychoenergies. She has a small PK factor but it is useless 
for self-defense or aggression. There is no coercive power per se—but the redact is developed 
to a formidable degree." Imidol sent an ironic thrust at his brother. "And you, if 
anyone, Interrogator, should know the potential for mischief in a corruption of the mindhealing 
power." 
Imi we have no time for pettypushies! Aloud, Riganone 
said, "The Galactic Milieu placed limitations on masterclass 
metas after the time of their rebellion. There is not only an 

ethical restraint but also an imposed superego block, which I saw very clearly during my probing. 
Elizabeth cannot harm a 
sentient being except in the gravest defense of her fellow hu-mans." 
Digestivemindpause. "A nice point," Culluket mused. "If we had sufficient 
time... a compulsion to self-destruction would be effective. 
Do you agree, Farspeaking Sister?" 
"Her emotional tone was deep gray," Riganone agreed. "She 
feels she is alone. Bereft." And so she is, came the Queen's soft tnotherthought. 
Imidol said, briskly, "Cull and I will design a suitable com-pulsion. 
We'll plan a coordinate thrust powered by the one 
hundred and nine members of the Host who are presently here 
in Muriah. If this isn't strong enough, we'll try again at Grand 
Combat time when the rest get here." "We can't count on compulsions alone," Culluket said. "I'll 
try to work out some other options. And when Nodonn arrives, 
he may think of some better means of dealing with her." 
"The Thagdal must never know!" the Queen warned them. 
Nor Gomnol, Culluket's mind added. 
"We have time for maneuvering," Riganone said. "Remem-ber 
that Elizabeth must go to Brede first for the initiation, and 
that will take some time. Not even the King would dare to 
interfere with an initiate—or with Brede." 
The enigmatic image of the Shipspouse hovered in all their 
minds. The guard and guide of their Exile, older than the oldest.of them, some said she was the 
most powerful of them all and 
few would doubt that she was the wisest. But Brede rarely 
intervened directly in the affairs of the High Kingdom on Earth. 
It had been a shock to the entire company when the King 
announced that Elizabeth would become the Shipspouse's in-itiate. 
"Brede!" Imidol exuded the contempt of the younger generation 
for venerable mysteries. "She has no allegiance to any 
faction. Still—Elizabeth is such a patent danger to us all, that 
perhaps if we appealed to the Shipspouse—" 
Riganone laughed without mirth. "Do you really believe 
that Brede doesn't know? She sees everything, hiding away in 
her room without doors! She very likely ordered the Thagdal 
to send the human woman to her!" 
"Damn Brede," said Culluket in vicious dismissal. "Let the 
Two-Faced One have Elizabeth for the time of initiation. What 
can she do? We'll get the human bitch somehow when the 
Shipspouse finishes with her. Elizabeth will never become queen-dam 
in your place, Mother." 
Never, never, vowed the other two. 
"Poor woman." The Queen arose and went out of the pa-vilion. 
It was time to seek the cool inner rooms of the palace. 
"I feel so sorry for her. If only there were another way." 
"There isn't," said Imidol. Dauntless in his coercer's blue 
and gold, he offered Nontusvel his arm. The four of them went 
off down the garden path. 
Back in the rose bush, the little spider was busy sucking 
the life juices from an aphis. When the finch swooped down 
on him, it was too late to duck..5 
"NOT SILVER ... OF COURSE NOT SILVER, BRYAN. GOLD!" 
Ogmol's high voice, incongruous in one of such heroic 
physique, was loud enough to carry over the normal clatter and 
buzz of the marketplace and cause shoppers and sellers to stare 
at him. There weren't that many Tanu wandering among the 
stalls anyway, and no males that Bryan could see. Here and 
there a willowy exotic lady, attended by a retinue of grays and 
ramas to carry the packages and hold the sunshade, bent over 
the offerings of an itinerant human jeweler, glassblower, or 
some other cottage artisan. There were a few silver-torcs among 

the browsers; but most of those who moved about the open 
plaza seemed to be torcless human householders or grays in 
the livery of the great houses, out to purchase fresh produce 
for the kitchen, flowers, live birds or animals, or other items 
not generally available in the many small shops that lined the 
perimeter of the Square of Commerce. 
"I've been over this with Creyn," Bryan said patiently. "No 
torc for me." He stopped to examine a table crowded with a 
jumble of oddly assorted twenty-second-century artifacts; can-teens, 
half-empty jars of cosmetics, tattered page-books, worn 
articles of clothing, broken musical instruments, defunct chron-ometers 
and voice writers, a few common decamole appliances 
and vitredur tools. 
"It would help you in your work,"Ogmol insisted. He took 
belated notice of the flea market wares Bryan was looking at. 
"These things—the usual castoffs. The more unusual and val-uable 
items from your era may be disposed of only through 
licensed dealers. But there is a black market, of course." 
"Mm," said Bryan, moving on. 
Ogmol returned to the previous tack. "There are no coercive.or dispositive circuits of any kind in 
a golden torc. In your 
case, since you have no significant latencies, the torc would 
merely enhance your telepathic ability—the metapsychic power 
every human has—and allow you to mindspeak with us. Think 
of the time we'd save! Consider the semantic advantage! You wouldn't miss a single nuance of your 
cultural immersion. The 
scope of your analysis would be broader, less prone to sub-jective 
error—" 
A vendor in a straw sombrero grinned and waved a skewer 
of small, freshly roasted birds. "Barbecued larks, Exalted Lords? 
My own Texas-style chili sauce!" 
"Popcorn," croaked a withered old woman in the stall next 
door. "New crop tetraploid. One kernel a snack in itself." 
"Only a few Perigord truffles left today, Lord." 
"Attar of roses! Orange-water to cool your temples! Just for 
you, Lord—a rare flagon of 4711!" 
Ogmol grimaced. "It's a fake. They ought to do something 
about these fellows ... But as I was saying, with a torc—" 
"The only working conditions I'll accept are those affording 
complete freedom." Bryan kept his good humor. Ogmol made 
a gesture of resignation and led the way to a building on the 
shady side of the square. A sign designated it BAKERY-KLEIN-FUSSCAFE. 
The crowd of shoppers parted respectfully before them. 
Tables were set on a flower-decked terrace fronting the bakery. 
A rama in a red-and-white checked tabard came trotting up, 
bowed, and took them to a table, where Ogmol collapsed in a 
wicker chair. 
"This walking in the heat of the day! I hope we can engage in less strenuous researches for a 
while, Bryan. I'm still a bit 
hung-over from the party last night. I don't know how you 
manage to look so bright." 
The rama swiftly produced two cups of coffee and a large 
tray of pastries. Bryan chose one. 
"Why, there's a pill. Our race had to wait a long time, but 
we finally developed an instant cure for overindulgence just in 
the last year or so. Tiny little pills. I packed a good number 
in my rucksack. A pity I didn't think to bring them this morning." 
"There!" moaned Ogmol. "The very thing I mean. If you 
wore a torc, you'd know how I was suffering without my having 
to tell you in so many words." He downed his coffee in a long 

gulp and the rama refilled the cup. "And you'd be able to make 
your wishes known to the ramas as well. See? That little chap.almost wanned up your cup before you 
were ready for it—but 
he'd never do that with me. You can't do much verbal com-munication 
with ramas, you know. Just 'come' and 'go,' that 
kind of thing. Persons without torcs have to use sign language 
with the little apes—and that can be very awkward for all but 
the simplest commands." 
Bryan only nodded, eating his pastry. It was delicious, evok-ing 
Vienna's best. Small wonder that the interior of the Bakery 
Kleinfuss was crowded with take-out customers. "As I under-stand 
it, the golden torc can't be removed once it's in place. 
And I also have learned that some personalities become seri-ously 
disturbed through wearing the thing. You can understand 
why I don't want to risk my sanity, Ogmol. There's no reason 
why my torcless status should limit my researches. I was a 
competent worker in the Milieu without metafaculties, and so 
were most of my colleagues. All that's necessary for a valid 
analysis is dependable source material." 
The Tanu's eyes shifted. "Well, yes. We'll try our very best 
to obtain that for you. My Awesome Father has given explicit 
orders." Bryan tried to be tactful. "Some of my investigations are 
bound to touch raw nerves. I can't help it in a study such as 
this. Even my superficial observations have begun to reveal a 
pattern of profound stress resulting from the impact of human 
and Tanu cultures." 
"The very thing my Father wishes to evaluate, Bryan. But 
the researches could be done so much more—gracefully on 
the mental level. Words are so dense." He downed another cup 
of coffee, squeezed his eyes closed, and pressed the fingertips 
of both hands to his golden torc. Many of the exotic men had 
faces of transcendent beauty; but Ogmol's was refreshingly 
handsome. His nose had a knot at the bridge, and his lips, 
between the short-cropped beard resembling tawny plush, were 
too thick and red. He resembled the King only in his deepset, 
jade-colored eyes—now lamentably blood-webbed. For the 
sake of coolness he was attired in a short sleeveless robe of 
cyan-blue and silver, symbolic of the Guild of Creators. His 
arms and legs were furred with wiry tan hair. 
"No use trying to psych the miseries away." Ogmol tapped 
his knuckles against his brow. "Plum brandy will have its 
revenge. You will let me have a pill or two for future use, 
won't you, old man?" 
"Of course. And I'll try to be as judicious as possible in.my investigations. It might take a 
little longer that way, but 
we'll get on." "Feel free to be as direct as you please with me." Ogmol 
gave a rueful chuckle. "My sensibilities are quite expendable." 
"Why do you say that?" 
"It's my duty to assist you. My honor. And as a half-blood, 
my skin isn't quite as thin as that of the—uh—isolate fraction." 
"Your mother was a human?" 
Ogmol waved away the rama and leaned back in his chair. 
"She was a silver. A sculptor from the Wessex world. She 
passed her latent creativity along to me, but she was too emo-tionally 
unstable to last long in the Many-Colored Land. I was 
her only offspring." 
"Would you say that there was significant prejudice against 
those of mixed heritage?" 
"It exists." Ogmol frowned, then shook his head. "But— 
damn words!—the disdain in which we're held by the Old 
Ones is strongly tinged by other emotions. Our bodies aren't 

as finely formed as theirs, but we're stronger physically. Most 
purebloods can't swim, but we have no difficulty in the water. 
Hybrids are more fertile, in spite of the fact that the full Tanu 
have a more urgent libido. And we're less likely to engender 
Firvulag offspring or black-torcs." He repeated the uneasy little 
laugh. "You see, Bryan, we hybrids are actually an improve-ment 
on the original model. That's what's so insupportable." 
"Mm," the anthropologist temporized. 
"As you can see, my body is superficially very similar to 
that of a pureblood: light hair, fair skin, typical light-sensitive 
eyes, elongated torso, attenuated limbs. But the ample body 
hair is a human heritage, and so is my more robust skeletal 
structure and musculature. Only a minority of the pureblooded 
men have this type of physique... the King and the battle-champions. 
Back in the home galaxy of the Tanu, a heroic 
body was rather an anachronism. A reminder of the crude 
origins of the race." 
"But the very heritage," Bryan observed, "that the exiled 
group was determined to revive. Interesting." 
The rama came running up with a large napkin, which Og-mol 
used to wipe his brow. It really was a pity, Bryan thought, 
that he had left the aldetox back at the palace. 
"But don't you see, Bryan, how difficult it is for the Old 
Ones to accept the fact that human genes optimize their racial 
survival on Earth? Hybrid vigor is a putdown to them. The Old.Ones are very proud. It's 
illogical—but they seem to be afraid of us mixed-bloods." 
"The mind-set wasn't uncommon even in my own era," 
Bryan admitted. He swallowed the last crumb of pastry and 
finished his coffee. "You said we might visit Lord Gomnol's 
establishment. Shall we go there next?" 
Ogmol grinned and fingered his torc. "You see? Another 
advantage! Give me a minute." 
The rama waiter stood passively beside the table, a monkey-child 
with intelligent, sad eyes. As Ogmol made his telepathic 
call, Bryan fished in one pocket for some of the local coinage 
he had been given and held out a random assortment. Solemnly, 
the hominid fingers extracted two pieces of silver. "No tip?" 
Bryan wondered. He looked around at the other tables. Not a 
single person without a torc was seated on the terrace. The 
barenecks had to make do with a self-service bar inside where 
human clerks took their verbal orders. 
"Good news," said Ogmol. "Gomnol is free and would be 
delighted to conduct you around his laboratories person-ally! 
... I see you've paid. Just let me—" 
The rama gave a little yip of pleasure and everted its lips 
at Ogmol. "Mental largesse, Bryan." 
"I should have guessed." 
They took a cab, drawn by a helladotherium, to the large 
complex on the northern edge of the city that housed the Coercer 
Guild. On the way down the wide boulevards they passed many 
small shops and neat attached dwellings. There was none of 
the quaint "Munchkin Tudor" architecture of the outlying set-tlements 
to be found in Muriah. Here the buildings had a clas-sical 
elegance of line that was almost Doric. The white and 
pastel masses were softened by lavish plantings, tended by the 
ever-present ramapithecines. The human inhabitants of Mu-riah— 
artisans, shopkeepers, service workers, troops, and 
functionaries—were universally well-fed and prosperous-look-ing. 
The only persons who could be classed as shabaroons were 
the peddlers in the open market, the caravan drovers, and trav-elers 
newly arrived from the hinterlands; even these seemed 

only temporarily grubby. Bryan saw no evidence of disease, 
privation, or maltreatment among the torcless element. On the 
surface, Muriah looked to be an idyllic small city. Ogmol told 
him that the total permanent population included some four 
thousand Tanu, a few hundred gold-torc humans, under a thou-.sand silvers, about five thousand 
gray-torcs, and six or seven 
thousand torcless. The ramas outnumbered the people by at 
least three to one. "We classify as Tanu any person who looks exotic," the 
brawny scholar explained. "Officially, there is no discrimi-nation 
among purebloods and mixed. And, of course, a gold-torc 
human is the social equal of a Tanu. In theory, anyhow." 
Bryan suppressed a smile. "Another reason for your urging 
a collar on me? Your association with a bareneck must be a 
trifle declasse. I noticed that the vendors were giving me a 
fishy look back in the market." 
Rather stiffly, Ogmol said, "Any person of consequence 
knows who you are. The others don't matter." They rode in 
silence for a while. Bryan considered another possible motive 
for the King's having commissioned the anthropological study. 
He was glad that Ogmol was unable to read his thoughts. 
They came to a handsome group of buildings at the very 
edge of the dropoff to the Catalan Gulf. The white marble of 
the Coercer Headquarters was inlaid and ornamented with blue 
and yellow. The forecourt had mosaic pavement with abstract 
designs. The roofs were sheathed in striking azure tiles with 
gutters and other fittings that glistened like gold. Squads of 
well-armed gray-torc guards in half-armor of blue glass and 
bronze poised stoically in the entry archway and at all of the 
doors. As the carriage passed and Ogmol emitted some unheard 
telepathic hail, the men thumped the butts of their vitredur 
halberds in salute. A detail stood by as Bryan and Ogmol 
alighted, making sure that the human cabdriver did not linger 
in Guild precincts. 
"The Coercers seem quite security-conscious," Bryan re-marked. 
"The torc works is here. In a certain sense, this place is the 
very keystone of our High Kingdom." 
They passed into cool corridors, where more guards stood 
like living statues—any boredom presumably assuaged by their 
gray torcs. Somewhere a deep-toned bell sounded three times. 
Bryan and Ogmol ascended a staircase and came to a pair of 
tall bronze doors. Four guards on station lifted a heavy orna-mental 
bar so that the two researchers could enter the ante-chamber 
of the President's office. There behind a console 
equipped with constructs of glowing crystal sat an exotic woman 
of singular beauty. Bryan felt something like an icy needle 
whisk behind his eyes.."Tana's mercy, Meva!" said Ogmol irritably. "Would I bring a hostile here? 
Doctor Grenfell was vetted by Lord Dionket 
himself!" 
I was? Bryan wondered. 
The woman said, "I only do my duty, Creative Brother." 
She gestured to the door of the inner sanctum, apparently opened 
it by psychokinesis, and returned to whatever esoteric work 
their arrival had interrupted. 
"Come in! Come in!" called a deeply pitched voice. 
They came before Gomnol, Lord Coercer, who inhabited a 
world all his own. The room was chilly in spite of the tropical 
climate of Muriah. A few coals smoldered in the grate of a 
manteled baronial fireplace, above which was a stark canvas 
that had to be a Georgia O'Keeffe. A Chihuahua dog eyed the 
newcomers dyspeptically from its cushion in front of the fire. 
The walls of the rooms were paneled in dark wood, interrupted 

by shelves crowded with leatherbound pagebooks, Tanu crys-talline 
audiovisuals, and plaques of the twenty-second century. 
A stand held a copy (surely it was a copy?) of Rodin's sinister 
little Tentation de Saint Antoine. Chairs and settees of tufted, 
wine-colored leather stood before a huge reproduction of a 
rococo-revival desk, upon which rested a green-shaped oil lamp, 
a tarnished silver inkstand with quill pen, a fruitwood humidor, 
and an onyx ashtray overflowing with cigar butts. A walnut 
credenza in the same ornate style as the desk, flanked by fern 
stands, held a dozen cut-glass decanters, a tray of Waterford 
tumblers, a soda siphon, and a small tin of Cadbury biscuits. 
(And what time-traveler had surrendered the last treasure to 
the Lord Coercer's irresistible demand?) 
In the midst of a cloud of fragrant smoke sat Eusebio Gomez-Nolan 
himself, wearing a quilted jacket of gold brocade with 
lapels and cuffs of midnight-blue satin. While perhaps not the "ugly little runt" deprecated by 
King Thagdal, he was only of 
medium stature by the standards of the Old World, with a nose 
that was not merely aquiline but verging on the bulbous. His 
eyes, however, were a beautiful luminous blue with dark lashes, 
and he smiled at his visitors, showing small, perfect teeth. 
"Be seated, colleagues," he said in a casual tone, gesturing 
with his cigar. 
Bryan asked himself how the devil this ordinary-looking 
little fellow had managed to install himself as President of the 
Coercer Guild. 
And Gomnol heard..Once in years long past, Bryan had sailed his small yacht 
into a hurricane that had broken loose from the weathermakers 
and wandered close to the British Isles. After enduring hours 
of battering, he had relaxed in a respite—only to see rising 
before his craft a mountainous green sea with a breaking crest 
that appeared to be at least thirty meters above him. Deliber-ately, 
this huge wave had curled over his yacht, pressing it 
under with a monster insouciance that he knew must end in 
annihilation. And so it was now with Gomnol's psychic force 
impinging upon his own stunned consciousness, pressing him 
easily toward a final darkness. 
The great storm-surge had unaccountably released his bro- ken but still seaworthy yacht. With a 
similar mannered fillip, 
Gomnol let loose of Bryan's mind. 
"That's how," said the President of the Coercer Guild. "Now. 
How may I assist your researches?" 
Bryan heard Ogmol explain the task that the High King had 
set and the techniques that they hoped to use to gather data for 
the culture-impace analysis. Lord Gomnol could help, if he 
would, not only by explaining the pivotal role of the torcs, but 
also by sharing his personal reminiscences, uniquely valuable 
because of his privileged human status. And if the Exalted Lord 
would prefer to confer with Dr. Grenfell alone... 
Smoke rings drawn around a friendly smile. "I believe that 
would be best. My congratulations on your delicacy of feeling, 
Creative Brother. Why not return and join us for dinner—say, 
in three hours? Splendid. Assure our Awesome Father that I'll 
take the very best care of the worthy Doctor of Anthropology." 
And then Gomnol and Bryan were alone in the pseudo-Victorian 
snuggery, and the psychobiologist was clipping the 
end off a fresh cigar and saying, "Now, then, my friend. What 
the devil is the likes of you doing in Exile?" "May I—have a drink?" 
Gomnol went to the decanters and lifted one containing a 
nearly colorless liquid. "We have the Glendessarry, but no 
Evian water, I'm afraid. Or would you care to try some of our 

homebrews? Five whiskies, a vodka, any number of brandies— 
the preferred tipple of our Tanu brethren." 
"Straight Scotch is fine," Bryan managed to say. When the 
whisky had restored his nerve a bit, he said, "I hope you won't 
regard me as a threat. Really—I'm not at all certain of the 
motivation behind the King's request myself. I came through 
the time-portal for the most ordinary of reasons. I was following.the woman I loved. I had 
expected to become a fisherman or 
a trader in a primitive Pliocene world. The interest in my 
profession by my Tanu captors was a complete surprise to me. 
I'm cooperating because I've been told this is the only way I'll 
get to see Mercy." Gomez-Nolan lowered one black brow in a half-scowl, 
seeming to scrutinize something floating in the air in front of 
Bryan. "That's your Mercy?" he inquired cryptically. "Good 
God." Not bothering to explain himself, he lit his cigar. "Come 
along. I'll show you the factory and tell you the Changeling's 
Tale." 
A slab of the paneling swung aside, revealing a long, well-lit 
passage. Bryan followed Gomnol in a wake of smoke. They 
came to a great gateway of bronze bars that folded aside of its 
own volition as Gomnol strode heedlessly into it. 
"Oh, yes. I have PK, too," the psychobiologist said. "And 
farspeak and redact. Not as strong as the coercive faculty, of 
course, but enough to be useful." 
They came into a large room filled with what appeared to 
be jeweler's benches. Human and Tanu men and women in 
blue smocks, wearing magnifying eyelenses, were making 
golden torcs. 
"This is the heart of the place, right here. All handwork for 
these. Subassemblies—the crystalline chips with the circuit-ry— 
have to be grown, then spattered and etched and sent here 
for installation within the metal shell. The Tanu brought only 
a single crystal-growing unit and chip etcher with them from their home galaxy, but I was able to 
build more to permit an 
increase in production of about tenfold." 
A rama went by, trundling a cart with containers of glittering 
components. Gomnol waved his cigar, causing a pink wafer 
to fly out of a box and into his fingers. "This little widget is 
my own psychoregulator that I developed for the silvers and 
grays. It puts the wearer at the mental disposal of any gold." 
Bryan could not help but envision Aiken Drum. 
Gomnol brightened. "A fascinating case. I wasn't at the 
feast, but they told me all about him. Too bad old Mayvar has 
him locked up over in Farsense House. Both Culluket and I 
are itching to interrogate him." 
"He worries the establishment?" 
Gomnol laughed. "The more naive elements. He doesn't worry me. The boy sounds like he must be a 
mental nova. 
Flash-in-the-pan pseudo-operant. The phenomenon wasn't un-.known in the Milieu. Certain latents 
can be shocked into op- erancy by some profound trauma. We've had it happen here 
once or twice before, although none of the cases was quite as 
memorable as this Aiken Drum seems to be. The temporary 
operant status of the brain overrides the controls of the silver 
torc. But the thing can't sustain itself and eventually burns 
out—googol to gaga, just like that." 
"I've heard about the sad cases who couldn't adopt to the 
torc. But I understand you've been wearing one for forty years 
without suffering a mental burnout." 
The man in the smoking jacket only smiled around his cigar. 
They wandered among the benches, watching the painstak-ing 
work. It took almost a week for a technician to complete 

one of the golden neck-rings—even longer for the delicate little torcs worn by Tanu children. 
These came in four sizes; 
and when a larger one was put on, the smaller could be safely 
removed and used on another child. 
"No silver torcs for children?" Bryan asked. 
"Tanu women don't have human offspring—not even when 
they mate with human males. And human women—whether 
gold or silver or gray or bareneck—are only permitted to con-ceive 
by Tanu males. All of their offspring are exotic as well, 
but with a much smaller percentage of Firvulag phenotypes in 
the litter than Tanu women produce. The Tanu hybrids vary 
greatly in metapsychic faculties, of course. So far, all of them 
are latent. But in time, the race will produce natural operants, 
just as humanity has done. The human advent was quite a 
genetic leg up for the Tanu, as you can imagine. On their 
own—without any human admixture—they wouldn't have gone 
operant for millions of years. The human-Tanu matings speed 
up the evolutionary process drastically. Given the quality of 
the latent stock coming through the time-gate. Prentice Brown 
had calculated that the Tanu would go reliably operant in only 
fifty generations. Of course, now..." "Elizabeth?" 
"Exactly. When we got word of her arrival, Prentice Brown 
and I recalculated the heritability of the different meta genes 
based upon Elizabeth's presumed genetic assay and the results 
were astounding. You can get the details from Prentice Brown 
himself over at Creation House. He's called Lord Greg-Donnet, you know." 
Bryan couldn't help thinking: Crazy Greggy. 
Again Gomnol laughed, teeth tightly clenching the cigar.."Some sooner, some later. Come along 
through here. The silver 
torcs are basically similar to the gold. But we've been able to 
automate a bit in the manufacture of the gray and rama types." 
"How," Bryan asked, "do the Firvulag fit into your genetic 
enterprise?" 
"They don't, as yet. A great pity from the eugenic view-point, 
as you've already deduced. The Little People are genuine 
operants, even if their powers tend to be limited. Unfortunately, 
both races have a horrendous taboo against interbreeding—and 
no Firvulag would touch a human with a barge pole. But some 
of us are working on the problem. If we could only convince 
the Tanu to keep their Firvulag children instead of passing them 
over to the Little People, we might have a chance of changing 
the mating pattern. It's fraught with possibilities." 
They did a quick run through the area where the gray torcs 
were made. There was more of a factory atmosphere in this 
workshop, where several simple stamping machines were turn-ing 
out torc shells and ramas were performing some of the 
assembly. Gomnol explained that the gray torcs were a variant 
of the device originally used on ramas by the pioneering Tanu, 
which he himself had modified into a psychoregulator suitable 
for humanity. 
"We still have some problems with the torcs, as you heard. 
But by and large they're much more effective than the docil- ization implants that were used on 
sociopaths in the Milieu. 
And the pleasure-pain circuitry and the farspeak augmentation 
are completely innovative." Gomnol's eyes darted sidelong. In 
a neutral tone, he added, "I designed the original docilization 
device at Berkeley, you know." 
Bryan's forehead furrowed. "I thought Eisenmann—" 
Gomnol turned away. In a tight voice, he said, "I was a 
graduate student working under him. A young fool. We had a 
touching father-son relationship and he was so proud of me. 

My work was promising, he said, but its potential might remain 
unrealized because I lacked the cachet necessary to attract Polity 
funding. However, if I worked under h i m ... there would be 
no problem. I was grateful and he was clever and the work 
was a resounding success. And now the entire Milieu knows 
Eisenmann the laureate. A few even remember Eusebio Gomez-Nolan, 
his faithful little assistant." 
"I see." 
The other man whirled around. "Oh, do you?" he flared. 
"Do you, indeed? Just forty years, and I've shaped an entire.culture—turned these exotics from a 
path of feckless barbarism 
toward civilization! If the genetic manipulation with Elizabeth 
comes about, they could become transtechnological, superior 
to the Unity of our unborn Galactic Milieu! What would Ei-senmann 
and those Stockholm idiots think if they could see all 
this?" Oh, God, Bryan thought. He tried to keep his own mind as 
blank as possible. What had Elizabeth told them back at the 
auberge? Count! Onetwothreefour onetwothreefour onetwo-threefour... 
But Gomnol was not attempting to read the panicked an-thropologist's 
thoughts. He was fully occupied with his own 
inner vision. "Many years ago, during the time of the Rebellion, 
a small number of other operants came through the time-gate. 
I wasn't ready. My position was still unconsolidated and the 
Tanu culture was in such a state of flux that matters were taken 
out of my hands before I could act. But I'm ready now! There 
are people working with me who share my views. With a new 
generation of operants standing with us, we'll prevail." 
Onetwothreefour onetwothreefour. "It's a remarkable am-bition, 
Lord Gomnol. Given the cooperation of Elizabeth, I 
don't see how it can fail." Onetwothreefour. 
The psychobiologist seemed to relax. He blew a smoke ring, 
then gave Bryan a hearty clap on the shoulder. "Keep an ob-jective 
eye, Grenfell. That's all I ask." 
They moved into another area, where the crystal modules 
for the mental-assay machines were being assembled. "Care to 
have your soul microanalyzed?" Now Gomnol was jovial. "We 
can do a much better job here than at Castle Gateway. Prototype 
of an improved model coming up. I could furnish you with 
your complete psychosocial profile as well as a latency analysis. 
It would take only a few hours." 
Onetwothreefour. "It wouldn't be too useful to you, I'm 
afraid. Lady Epone wasn't impressed when she tested me back 
at the castle." 
An expression of wariness clouded the Lord Coercer's smile. 
"Yes. It was Epone who checked your Group out, wasn't it." 
He fell silent, and after a perfunctory stroll through research 
and testing facilities, where Gomnol was evasive about the 
exact nature of the work being done, they went down a long 
ramp that led from the factory to an atrium open to the sky 
and cooled by the jets of a spectacular fountain. They sat at a.shaded table and rama servants in 
blue-and-gold livery brought 
a drink resembling iced sangria. 
"One of your Group was a young woman named Felice," 
Gomnol said. "She's been involved in a serious accident. Can 
you tell me anything about her background?" 
Onetwothreefour. 
Bryan recapitulated all that he could remember of the girl's 
career as a ring-hockey player, her attack on the auberge coun-selor, 
her great physical strength and obvious deviation from 
the psychosocial norm. "I never saw her profile. But her ability 
to control animals is certainly suggestive of latency. I'm rather 

surprised that she didn't rate a silver torc. Was she badly injured 
in the accident?" "She wasn't hurt at all." Gomnol's tone was studiously 
neutral. "The travelers in her caravan staged a revolt on the 
way to Finiah. The Lady Epone, a powerful coercer, was killed, 
together with the entire escort of gray-torc troops. The prisoners 
escaped, but most of them were later recaptured. They agreed 
under interrogation that your friend Felice had been the ring-leader 
of the affair." 
Onetwothreefour! "That's incredible. And did she—did you 
recapture Felice?" 
"No. She and three other members of your Group are still 
at large. Most of the Tanu Great Ones are inclined to think 
that the affair was a fluke. There have been other minor up-risings 
from time to time, sometimes abetted by the Firvulag. 
But never before this have bare-neck humans been able to kill 
a Tanu. If Felice engineered it, I must find out how." 
Onetwothreefour Onetwothreefour. "I don't think there's 
much more I can tell you about her that would be useful. She 
struck me as a peculiar and dangerous child. She's only about 
eighteen, you know." 
Gomnol sighed. "The children are always the most dan-gerous 
... Finish your drink, Bryan. I think we just have time 
to visit the classrooms of the apprentice coercers before the 
end of the afternoon. You'll enjoy meeting my youngsters. I 
have the highest hopes for them. The very highest." 
Puffing his cigar, Eusebio Gomez-Nolan took Bryan off to 
view fresh marvels..6 
SUKEY'S FEAR HAD LESSENED NOW BUT THERE WAS STILL THE underlying sense of terror at being 
separated from Stein. But 
she no longer worried that he might be in danger; Aiken Drum, 
that inexplicable jester, would take care of him. 
But what would become of her! 
Creyn had come for her—friendly, familiar Creyn, the only 
person besides Elizabeth that she would have willingly fol-lowed. 
(And how had they known?) She rode now with the 
exotic healer in a hellad-drawn caleche to the College of Re-dactors, 
which was situated high above the city on a road that 
led up the forested Mount of Heroes. Olive trees heavy with 
plum-sized fruit grew along the verge and in the walled com-pounds 
of handsome white villas. She saw groves of citrus and 
almond; and, higher up the slope, rows of grapevines were 
being dressed by ramas. To the west the land of Aven stretched 
in a crazy quilt of greens and golds to the Dragon Range dimly 
visible on the horizon. Most of the region seemed under in-tensive 
cultivation, a striking contrast to the salt flats and pale 
bluish lagoons of the surrounding Mediterranean Basin. 
As the carriage climbed higher, Sukey was able to see the 
peculiar topography of the ancient seabed south of Balearis. A 
scarp nearly 100 meters high fell off sharply on that side of 
the peninsula. Below lay an undulant slope of snow-white dunes, 
broken here and there by buttes and eroded pillars of what 
seemed to be pastel-colored salt. A small river coming off the 
peninsula slightly west of Muriah had carved a canyon through 
sparkling sediments. The watercourse wandered over the barren 
bed of this gorge, whose walls showed pale strips of color, and 
eventually reached the southern arm of the lagoon. East of the.river channel and extending below 
the tip of Aven were flats that reflected the sunlight with a mirror dazzle. 
"The White Silver Plain," Creyn told her. "We hold the 
Grand Combat down there, setting up cities of tents on either 
side of the Well of the Sea. Nearly ten thousand Tanu and 
human fighters come to the Combat from all parts of the Many-Colored 

Land, together with five times that number of noncom-batants. 
And the Firvulag come as well, all tricked out in their 
bright and fearsome illusions with the black armor hidden be-neath, 
carrying monstrous effigy standards hung with dyed 
scalps and festoons of gilded skulls." 
Her mind's eye gaped at the picture he conjured up—first 
of the preliminaries, where the Firvulag played their uncouth 
games while the Tanu contended in splendid tournaments and 
races with chalikos and chariots. And then the manifestation 
of powers when the battle-leaders were chosen, and finally the 
High Melee itself, with Tanu and human and Firvulag thun-dering 
toward one another, shining hero versus hideous demon 
in battles pitting arm against arm, mind against mind, for three 
days—with the seizing of banners or standards and the taking 
of heads, the whirl of glass and bronze and leather and sweating 
flesh, the victors howling and glowing in the dark like torches, 
while the losers lay silent, spilling their blood back on the 
s a l t ... 
"No!" Sukey cried. "No—not Stein!" But he would love 
it— 
Peace flooded through her. Be at ease littleSistermind. It is a ways away and things 
may happen and not allTanu revel in its bloodshed O no not 
all. 
"I don't understand," she said, searching Creyn's shuttered 
face. "What are you trying to tell me?" 
"You're going to have to be strong. Bide your time until 
the proper moment and take a long view of matters. Keep hope 
high even when... distressing things happen to you. Stein and 
Aiken Drum have a hard way ahead of them, but yours may 
be harder." 
She tried to probe him, to discover what lay behind that 
walled and kindly gaze, but it defeated her. She fell back into 
the simpler comfort that he offered, hardly caring any more 
what happened to her so long as there was a chance it might 
come right in the end. "There is a chance, Sukey. Remember. And be brave.".Walls and turrets of 
silver and scarlet loomed over their 
carriage. They passed beneath an arch of marble filigree and 
halted before a white structure with pillars of red marble. A 
Tanu woman gowned in filmy white came out and took Sukey's 
hand. 
Creyn introduced her. "The Lady Zealatrix Olar, who will 
be your teacher here in the House of Healing." 
Welcome Daughterdear. What is your name? 
Sue-Gwen. "A goodly name," said the woman aloud. "We will give 
you the honorific Minivel, and you will rejoice to know that 
the lady who bore it last lived for two thousand years. Come 
with me, Gwen-Minivel!" 
Sukey turned to Creyn, lips trembling. 
"I leave you in the best of hands," he said. "Courage." 
And then Creyn was gone, and Sukey followed Olar into 
the headquarters of the Guild of Redactors. It was quiet and 
cool, the decor mostly a chaste white and silver with only 
occasional accents of the heraldic red. Only a few people were 
to be seen; there were no guards. 
"May—may I question you, Lady?" Sukey asked. 
"Certainly. Later there will be the testing and the discipline. 
But now, at the beginning, I will show you the work that we 
do and answer your queries as fully as possible." And correct 
and guide and light. 
"Persons like me—with silver torcs, or gold. How long 
may we live in this world? Is it as you imply—" 

Smile. Come see. Anticipate! 
They descended into arched catacombs within the rock of 
the mountain, lit with ruby and white lamps. Olar opened a 
thick door and they entered a circular room, quite dark, where 
a lone Tanu redactor sat on a central stool with his eyes closed 
in meditation. Slowly, Sukey's vision accommodated itself to 
the dimness. What she had mistaken for white statues ranged 
around the wall proved to be people, their naked bodies com-pletely 
shrouded in transparent, clinging cauls that resembled 
some plastic membrane. 
May I examine? 
Freely. She moved around the room, looking at the standing figures. 
Here was a gold-torc human male, reduced to a virtual skeleton 
by cachexia. Beside him was a Tanu woman, apparently lost 
in serene sleep, one pendulous breast distorted by a tumor. A.Tanu child, motionless, her eyes 
wide open, had one arm sev-ered 
below the elbow. A robust goldenbeard, smiling as he 
dreamed inside the artificial amnion, displayed the slashes and 
punctures of a hundred wounds. Another warrior type had both 
hands burned away. Next to him stood a human woman in late 
middle age, her body sagging but unmarked. 
"The more severe cases are dealt with on an individual 
basis," said Olar. "But these our Healing Brother may minister 
to en masse. The membrane is a psychoactive substance we 
call Skin. Through a combination of psychokinesis and redac-tion, 
the practitioner is able to muster healing energies from 
the patient's own mind and body. Injuries, disease, cancers, 
the debilities of age—all respond to treatment if the patient's 
mind is strong enough to cooperate with the healer." 
Limitations? 
"We cannot restore brain injuries. And it is against our ethic 
to restore those who are decapitated in combat or ritual obser-vances. 
If a person is not brought to treatment before full brain-death, 
we cannot help. Nor can we restore the aged whose 
minds have been allowed to deteriorate beyond a critical point. 
Given these limitations, we are not as advanced as the science 
of your Galactic Milieu, which could regenerate an entire cer-ebral 
cortex if only a gram of tissue remained, or rejuvenate 
even the most decrepit if their will was strong." 
"Still—this is marvelous," Sukey breathed. "May I hope 
to do this kind of work some day?" 
Olar took her hand and led her from the room. "Perhaps, 
child. But there are other tasks. Come and see." 
They looked through one-way windows into rooms where 
the mentally deranged were undergoing deep-redact. A large 
percentage of the patients were young people, and Olar ex-plained 
that these were mostly Tanu-human hybrids experi-encing 
difficulties adapting to the torc. 
"We treat human golds and silvers as well. However, some 
human brains are fundamentally incompatible to the long-term 
effects of the torc's amplification. Bringing such patients to 
full sanity may be impossible. Lord Gomnol has provided us 
with devices that indicate feasibility. We may not waste the 
time of our talented redactors on hopeless cases." 
"I don't suppose you waste time on gray-torcs, either," 
Sukey said in a low voice. Elizabethstyle barrier firmly in place. 
"No, dear. Ordinarily not. Valuable as our grays are to us, 
they are ephemerides—here and gone in a brief flash of vitality..The healing is a difficult and 
time-consuming process. It is not 
for them... Now, come and see our babies growing!" They ascended to the upper reaches of the hugebuilding 

and came to sunny rooms full of bright-colored play equipment. 
Beautifully groomed female ramapithecines romped and lolled under the benevolent eyes of human and 
Tanu keepers. In adjoining rooms, ramas were eating or sleeping or submitting 
to various kinds of care. Every one of the little apes was preg-nant. 
"You may know," Olar said in an offhand manner, "that 
we Tanu women have experienced difficulty reproducing on this world. Early in our Exile, we 
utilized ramas as nurturers 
of the zygote. Ova fertilized in vitro are implanted within these animals and nourished. The ramas 
are too small to carry the 
fetuses to term, of course. But when development has pro-gressed 
as far as possible, the infant is delivered by caesarian section. The mortality is nearly eighty 
percent, but we feel that 
the precious survivors are well worth the struggle. In the earliest 
days, these surrogate mothers seemed to be our only hope of 
racial survival. Fortunately, that situation no longer applies." They left the ramas and tiptoed 
through a darkened ward 
where premature infants slept in sheltering glass creches. Sukey was amazed to see Firvulag as 
well as Tanu babies receiving 
devoted care. "They are our shadow-brethren," Olar told her. "We are obliged by the most ancient 
precepts of our way to rear them to term and subsequently turn them over to their own folk." 
And then hunt and kill them? 
You will understand one day littleSistermind. It is our way. 
If you would survive it must become your way. "And now," Olar spoke out loud, "we will visit the 
Lady 
Tasha-Bybar." 
Behind her mental screen, Sukey cried out. "The procedure is very brief, but it is usually some 
weeks 
before the menstrual cycle reasserts itself normally. We will take care of this small matter 
before beginning your appren-ticeship 
so that there will be a minimum of delay in your 
initiation." Keeping a firm grip on herself, Sukey said, "I—I protest. 
To be used in this fashion." Peacecalmsolace. "It is your lot. Accept it. There is so much 
joy to be gleaned in compensation! And the Lady Bybar is very skilled. You will feel no 
pain.".Olar stood still for a moment, fingers resting on her golden 
torc. She nodded, smiled, and took Sukey up a winding stair-way 
into one of the high turrets. The room at the top was fully 
thirty meters in diameter, commanding a fantastic view of the 
surrounding countryside and the misted, glaring salt. 
In the middle of the polished black floor was a long golden 
table surrounded by small trolleys with jewel-bright objects 
gleaming on their open shelves. The reflector dish of a huge 
lamp, unlit, hung above the equipment. 
"The Lady Bybar will first dance for you, Gwen-Minivel. 
She does you great honor. Wait here now until she comes, and 
comport yourself with a dignity befitting your silver torc." 
With that, Olar left her alone. 
Hesitating and fearful, Sukey approached the central table. 
It was! There were clamps and stirrups. And the jewel-bladed 
things were just what she had suspected. 
Tears blinded her and she stumbled away from the appa-ratus. 
She cried out secretly: Stein I would for you. 
Or she could still run ... 
Olar's mind-grip caught her. She was forced to stop, to turn 
around, to watch in stunned incredulity as Tasha-Bybar entered 
and began her dance. 
The human body was as pale and as lush as that of an houri — 
and so exaggerated in its sexuality that Sukey's instinct told 
her it must have been artificially enhanced. There was hair only 
upon the woman's head, and this flared like a blue-black cloak 
when she spun and leaped, and rippled almost to her knees 
when she was momentarily still. 

All that she wore was bells, and the golden torc. The bells 
were small and round, fastened to her living flesh in graceful 
twisting patterns. They had differing notes; and as the dancer's 
muscles flexed and extended, an elfin melody born of the move-ment 
itself sounded in the huge, nearly empty room. The rhythm 
was that of Sukey's pulse. She stood frozen and helpless as 
the dancer approached in great fluid leaps, arms beckoning as 
they wove their eerie song, feet stamping with an accelerating 
insistence that compelled Sukey's heart to beat faster and faster. 
The dancer's sunken eyes were as black as her hair. Nearly 
colorless lips drew back in a rictus above her teeth. Around 
and around Sukey the dancer spun, increasing the tempo of 
the music until Sukey was dizzy, nauseated, trying in vain to 
close her eyes and ears and mind to the flashing chiming gy-rating 
thing that seized her and whirled her into oblivion..7 
"YOU'VE FIXED IT! YOU'RE A BONNY BOY, MY SHINING ONE." 
Mayvar the Hag watched in delight as the tiny figures on 
the timepiece came sliding out on their tracks and circled one 
another. The turquoise-and-jet dragon flapped golden wings 
and lunged, clashing its jeweled fangs. The knight in opal armor 
fended off the little monster, then raised his glittering sword 
and struck; once... twice... three times. The clock told the 
hour. The dragon expired, chopped into three sections revealing 
ruby entrails. The entire turntable at the front of the timepiece 
revolved, carrying the tableau back inside golden doors. 
Aiken Drum stowed tools back into pockets. "It wasn't that 
hard to fix. Crud in the drivetrain, a worn tooth on one of the 
little gears. You ought to have a glassblower make a dome to 
cover it, sweets. Preventive maintenance." 
"I will," the old woman promised. She lifted the elaborate 
toy from the table where Aiken had been working on it to a 
safe place on a high shelf. Then she turned to him and held 
out both hands, grinning. 
"Again?" he protested. "Insatiable old bag, aren't you?" 
"All we Tanu women are," she cackled, pulling him toward 
the bedroom, "but there's few that can rise up to Mayvar and 
live, my Shining One, as you should know by now. So when 
I find such as you I must test and prove him. And if he lasts— 
ah, then!" 
The room was very dark and cool and the awful old woman 
only a shadow waiting. Free of the golden suit, floating in the 
air, he came to her and was devoured. But there was no fear 
in him or cringing—not after the first time had shown him 
what lay beyond the repellent husk. 
O amazing Hag with your hidden cauldron of near-deadly.rapture! You'd take the entire measure of 
life-force if I'd let you—snuff me after I'd fed your ancient nerve-fires and stoked 
them to youth again! But I won't die, Hag. I won't burn out. 
I'm up to you, old Mayvar, and beyond and above you, drawing 
you along with me while you scream. Come along and don't 
falter, Mayvar! Cry to die, Mayvar! Then burst and tumble 
down when you've had your surfeit of the Shining One who 
meets your test again and laughs... 
The golliwog put on his golden boots and gave her ugliness 
a touch of pure affection. "You know, you're pretty good 
yourself, Witch." "Once the Thagdal said the same." She uttered a long sigh. "And my darling 
Lugonn, that I had such hopes for before he 
died." She showed him the way it had been, back at the Ship's 
Grave, when all of them had first arrived in the Many-Colored 
Land. 
"What a funny race you are," Aiken said. "Not civilized at 
all. You'd be in a fine mess by now if humans hadn't come 

through the time-gate and organized things for you. You should 
be grateful instead of resenting us!" 
"I don't resent you," Mayvar said complacently. "Come 
close, my bonny boy." She took it from under the pillow and 
held it out to him. 
"Do I need it?" he asked her, mouth quirking with the old 
mischief. "Would you have even more of me, glutton Mayvar?" 
But this time she was serious. "You've still a way to go 
and a way to grow before you're a match for the greatest of 
the Host, Aiken Drum. There are those who can kill you— 
make no mistake. If you're wise, you'll go about this prudently 
and follow my counsel. Take it." 
He settled the twisted golden ring around his neck and snapped 
the ends shut. Mayvar's gnarled fingers unfastened the old 
silver torc and dropped it beside the bed. 
"I'll do as you say, Witch dear. And savor the fun to the 
fullest every step along the way." 
She got up from the bed and he helped her to don the purple 
robe. Then they went out into her sitting room, where he combed 
her white hair and called for refreshment, which they both 
stood in need of. 
"You've proved yourself to me," Mayvar said at length, 
"but you must also prove yourself to them. They must freely 
accept you. This is our way." 
A tinkling fanfare came from the golden clock on the shelf..Once again the dragon slithered forth 
and the knight came stalking him; and this time, the bejeweled prey was hewn into 
four sections to mark the striking of the hour. 
"You want me to go and do likewise," Aiken observed. 
"Show all the folks what a grand barbarian warrior I am by 
making good on my monster-killing boast." 
"It'll be a significant proof, the slaying of Delbaeth." She 
began to rock back and forth, chortling, hands clasping bony 
knees through the fabric of her gown. "Oh—you caught their 
attention with that offer, lad! Tana herself must have put the 
notion into your mind." 
His response was laconic. "Your High King was so loud 
broadcasting his anxiety about the spook that it was impossible 
to resist." 
"Ah! But, you see, there'd be talk of how the Thagdal 
himself should deal with Delbaeth! And since he's really too 
old, he'd have to ask Nodonn to do it. And that would obligate 
him to the Host, and—ah, you'll know about the politics soon enough. But as for Delbaeth—this 
Firvulag is one of the most 
powerful sort. He's a giant, not one of the little kind. He's 
been rampaging around burning up plantations outside of Af-aliah, 
on what you'd call the Spanish mainland, for nearly a 
year now. Much of our provisioning here at the capital comes 
from the Afaliah region, and we also count on those farms for 
the extra supplies needed during Grand Combat time. Now, 
Afaliah's Lord is Celadeyr. He's a First Comer and a feisty 
old shit-kicker of a Creator-Coercer—but no match for Del-baeth. 
None of us are—-if you match power for power. Old 
Celo's tried to Hunt down the Shape of Fire, but he gets out-witted 
every time when the Firvulag runs off and hides in the 
caves of the Gibraltar Isthmus. Things are getting serious, with 
the Grand Combat nearly on us, and Celo has demanded the 
assistance of the High King. The Thagdal is obliged to re-spond." 
Aiken nodded. "I get it. But the King is getting a bit long 
in the tooth for that kind of adventure. Rogering maidens is 
more his style these days." 
"He may properly designate any champion as his agent to 

deal with Delbaeth. But you forced him to send you! Do you 
see how galling it must be? An outsider—a human!—taking on a job that's defeated Tanu stalwarts. 
And all by accident, 
you've put one up Nodonn, too, since he was too wily to 
volunteer before the King asked him! If you succeed in killing.Delbaeth, wearing the gold and all, 
you tell the world that you 
think you're as good as any of them." 
"Just as Gomnol did?" 
She half-closed her pouched eyes, simultaneously projecting 
a vision of the long-ago triumph of the human Lord Coercer 
for Aiken's study. She looked out over the White Silver Plain 
where it had happened. "Gomnol would have aspired higher," 
she said softly, "but I spurned him, even though he could have 
sated me. Sterile! Or more correctly, so riddled with lethal 
genes that even the science of your Galactic Milieu had been 
powerless to correct his faulty plasm. The Kingmaker rejects 
such o f f a l ... Needless to say, I've already determined that you 
have no such deficiency." 
Hands on hips, he threw back his head and laughed. "What 
a cold-blooded witch you are! And I thought it was all for sweet 
passion's sake." 
Destiny rules passion in us both ShiningOne. 
"You weird old crone!" he cried. "Meddling old bag of 
bones! Power-hungry ballbreaker! Get your stringy old ass to 
Redact House and crawl into the Skin and have them make 
you young again. We'll go and screw 'em all together, Lovie!" 
Grasping one of her hands, he spun her tall figure around— 
then stopped short at the expression on her face and the vision 
that accompanied it. 
"I've been lucky, Aiken. Most of my kind are only able to 
choose once. But I picked the Thagdal, and I chose his suc-cessor 
as well—although Tana's will took dear Lugonn before 
my choice could be made manifest. After he was gone, I waited 
these thousand years, weighing the hopefuls as it's my duty to 
do. But all of them fell short in one way or another. And so I 
had settled on the best of the rejected, Nodonn Battlemaster 
of the Host. His mind is stupendous and his heritage is ac-ceptable— 
but ah what a meager flame he kindles, for all his 
jealous pride! What a poor stick to the engendering of a race 
of heroes! But he was the best we had until..." 
"Silly Hag." The knotted fingers stroked his golden torc, sending sweet 
fever rushing through him. 
She crooned, "Lucky Mayvar! To see the third one come 
after all. Ah, but I've reached my limit with you, bright laddie! 
Three thousand three hundred and fifty-two of your years I've 
lived and done the love testing for the Tanu. You'll be the.death of me, Aiken Drum. But not, 
please Tanu, until I've 
seen you safely installed." 
"First things first," he said, divesting himself of her mental 
caress with some reluctance. "This Delbaeth. You realize that 
I don't have the faintest idea how to go about killing him? I 
talk a good game, but when push comes to shove, the spook 
might just burn the fewkin' gold britches off me! Wouldn't 
that be a nice end to our schemes?" 
Mayvar gave a gay titter. "Would I send my own Initiate 
away unprepared? You'll be taught to use your powers properly 
before you go on the Delbaeth Quest. Two weeks under my 
tutelage—and that of mighty Bleyn, and Alberonn Mindeater, 
and the mistress of illusion, Katlinel the Darkeyed—and you'll 
be more than a match for this Firvulag... And to be on the 
safe side, I'll give you something else as well. What you would 

call an ace in the hole." 
"Witch!" He sniggered. "What is it?" 
"You'll never guess! No true Tanu would dare to use it 
because of the mortal danger to himself. But it'll be harmless 
to you, my bonny boy, and it'll dispose of Delbaeth if you but 
track him down. You must keep it secret from the others if 
you love your life—but with you as clever as I know you are, 
it should be no problem." 
"What is it, for God's sake?" He grasped her by her bony 
shoulders and shook her as she continued to tantalize him, 
dangling a small mental image just out of reach. 
At last she sobered. "Come along to the cellar, then, and 
I'll show it to you." 
Stein was in an uneasy and dangerous mood, his great hands 
white-knuckled as he gripped the railing and pretended to watch 
the apprentice fighters larruping each other out in the arena. 
The upper level of his mind listened obediently to the running 
commentary of the Lord of Swords, who pointed out the tech-nique— 
or lack of it—displayed by the young gray-torcs. Be-neath 
the veneer, however, Stein was raging. Bluff Tagan, 
preoccupied with his exposition of martial arts, never noticed; 
but the gold-torc human woman who had been delegated by 
Mayvar to shepherd Stein on a tour of Muriah was all too aware 
of the giant's growing impatience. With a farspeaker's tact, 
she insinuated herself. 
FriendStein are you weary of viewing fighterscnool? Had 
hoped it would amusedistract..Something wrong Sukeywife. What WHAT Lady Dedra I will know! 
"... and observe that young ox in the rust-colored kilt, Stein. 
Kurdish stock. Splendid musculature and as game as they make 
'em, but he won't last five minutes in a Low Melee if he doesn't 
learn to stop telegraphing his ripostes. You don't need a torc 
to read that one's mind! Now, if you want a real study in 
finesse, keep a close eye on those two Maasai types sparring 
with vitredur lances. That's the kind of work that makes an 
old fighter's blood sing ..." 
Calmcalm relax Stein. Remember VenerableMayvar's di-rectivepromise 
+ that AikenDrum: no harm to Sukey. 
Disbelief! FURY. I hear her she is crying afraid bellspun falling reach out Lady Dedra to her find 
her tell me why she 
cries! Verywell I will look but do not betray yourself Tagan-Coercer 
freshaware your inattention. 
Aloud, Stein said, "Those fellows have the moves, Lord 
Tagan. I'm no expert, but they look damn impressive. But I 
don't see how they'd have much of a chance in a contest against 
one of your Tanu brain benders." 
"Most of this lot will only fight in the Contest of Humans— 
against one another. It's only the best who get to fight side by 
side with the metapsychic warriors in the High Melee against the 
Firvulag. Brave and strong-minded grays have managed to give 
a good account of themselves in the High. It's a matter of resisting 
the fear-provoking illusions of the Little Folks and keeping your 
mind on business. Of course, ultimately most of the grays..." 
The vision winked out almost as soon as it formed in Tagan's 
telepathic projection; but it had been clear enough to Stein. 
The Lord of Swords peered obliquely at the Viking. Tagan 
looked more weather-beaten than most of the other Tanu, with 
a drooping gold mustache, and shaggy brows hedging sunken 
green eyes. "There have been exceptions to the usual fate of 
the gray fighter. A really superlative gladiator can expect a 
reprieve. And not just until the next year's Combat, either. 
Permanently. To serve on my staff here at the school." 

Dedra said, "You know, Coercive Brother, that Stein's as-signment 
must come ultimately from the Lady Mayvar, who 
has taken to kin the Candidate Aiken Drum." Putative master 
of this perhapsbriefliving gray. 
The blue-armored Tanu gave a mental sneer, dismissing 
both Mayvar and her upstart protege. "We'll see you in the.Combat one way or another, Stein. 
You're a natural, boy! I saw you at the supper. Just a few weeks of work here..." The 
coercer reached out: comradeship, adrenalin, challenge, re-lease, 
gore, sweet shattering fatigue! "How about it, lad?" 
Stein opened his mouth to curse the Lord of Swords. But 
what he said was, "I thank you, Lord Tagan, for thinking that 
I might be worthy to study under a great champion such as 
you. After my master and I dispose of the loathsome Delbaeth, 
we'll be free to think of the upcoming Combat. My master will 
confer with you in good time." 
I didn't speak you spoke damnedDedra let me go let me go 
let me— 
"We will leave you now, Coercive Brother," Dedra said, 
bowing and drawing her lavender chiffon cloak about her slen-der 
body. The sun had gone down behind the rim of the arena, 
which might have explained why she had begun to shiver. "You 
may be sure that Stein and his master, Aiken Drum, will con-sider 
your generous offer most seriously." Stop it! Stop fighting 
me you great blockhead! 
Tagan smote his armored breast with a sapphire gauntlet. 
"I salute you, Farspeaking Sister, Exalted Lady Mary-Dedra. 
Remember me to your President... And you, valiant 
Stein. We hold the City Games thrice weekly here and at the 
Plain of Sports. Join us! Tomorrow our top wrestlers will test 
the first of the giant apes that were recently captured in the 
North African hills. It promises a bit of excitement!" 
Stein was forced to remove his horned helmet and abase 
himself before the Lord of Swords. And then he had to hurry 
along after the gold-torc woman through cold, echoing passages 
that led beneath the arena to the carriage-yard where their 
caleche waited. The corridors were dark and deserted. Stein 
called for Dedra to wait for him, but she threw a glance over 
her shoulder and began to run instead. Her mind, operating on 
the coercive mode, reiterated: 
You will submit to me you will be calm you will submit— 
"Something's happened to Sukey, hasn't it?" he cried out. 
You will submit to me you will be calm— 
"You're afraid to tell me!" His stride lengthened. "I can't 
hear her calling me any more!" 
Youwillsubmit youwillsubmit YOUWILLSUBMIT! 
The pressure of his rage built into a great igneous flood, 
undermining her restraints, melting them. "They've killed her— 
haven't they?" the berserker roared. Dedra dodged away from.him, almost falling on the damp stone 
floor. "Answer me, you 
stupid bitch! Answer me!" 
YOU WILL... 
Stein gave a shout, mingling pain and triumph, as the last 
of the mental shackles dissolved. A single leap brought him 
up to Dedra and he snatched the human woman into the air, 
spinning her around so that the panic-stricken, lovely face stared 
up helplessly. He bent her spine backwards and drew her into 
a dark niche, clammy and odorous, at one side of the corridor. 
"I'm going to break your back if you make one sound! And 
don't call out in the farspeak mode, either, because I'll hear 
you. Understand? Answer me, dammit!" 
Stein O Stein you misapprehend we wish no harm we would 

help— 
"You listen to me," he hissed, relaxing the tension slightly. 
"There's no one down here but you and me. No one to come 
and save you. Mayvar should have given me a stronger keeper 
than you, Dedra. She should have known you'd never be able 
to hold me." 
"But Mayvar would—" 
He gave her a brutal shake. "Stop trying to get back into 
my mind, bitch!" She moaned and her head lolled sideways. 
"I want to know what's happened to my wife! You know and 
you'll tell me—" 
"She's alive, Stein." Jesus God man you're crushingbreak-ing 
me ease up the spinalnerve bruising ahhhh... 
He relaxed, propping her sagging body against the rough 
stone wall. She hung there like a cut-string marionette, belly 
swelling against her rucked-up lilac gown, lavender-and-gold 
headdress awry. Her mental explanation came rushing out. 
As with all silvertorchumanwomen yourSukey gone to By-bar 
for fertility restoration. 
"They promised me she wouldn't be harmed! Mayvar prom-ised— 
and that bloody little gold grannybanger. They prom-ised!" 
Tears white arms reaching compassionbalm... "She hasn't 
been hurt, Stein. Can't you understand? We had to treat Sukey 
like an ordinary candidate. If an exception had been made 
before Aiken's position among the battle-company was af-firmed— 
don't! Don't hurt me again! Can't you see I'm telling 
you the truth? Mayvar and Dionket must move cautiously at 
this stage or all the planning goes for nothing. There's more 
at stake here than you and your wife!".Stein let her go. She sank to the dirty floor. Her mind was 
numb, shallowly adrift. The violet human eyes looked at him 
from amidst runnels of tears. "We never meant Sukey to go to 
the Thagdal. There's time. At least a month before her female 
cycle is reestablished." 
"When will your Tanu bastard be born, bitch? To hell with 
Mayvar and Dionket and their schemes! To hell with all of 
you! I could hear Sukey calling me, dammit, and now she's 
stopped. You prove to me that she's alive and unharmed 
or—" 
Take him to her. 
Stein gave a start. His hand dropped to his sword hilt and 
he looked wildly about. The corridor was empty. 
"I warned you, Dedra!" His face clouded again with fury. 
She raised one shaking finger to her golden torc. "It's May-var. 
She's seen and heard. I'm to take you to Sukey. Now will 
you believe that we're on your side?" 
He pulled her to her feet. Her gown was snagged and stained. 
Swiftly, he unpinned the brooch of his own short green cape 
and flung the covering garment about her shoulders. "Can you 
walk?" 
"As far as the carriage. But give me your hand." 
Outside, the bareneck gaffer who waited with their caleche 
was dozing as the cicadas turned up for their evening perfor-mance. 
Ramas were going about with short ladders and slow-matches, 
lighting the streetlamps. The broad promenade that 
skirted this side of the stadium had only a few cabs rolling 
along and no pedestrians except for the busy little apes. Respectfully, Stein handed the Lady 
Dedra into the carriage 
before going around to the other side and climbing in. 
"Where to, marm?" the driver croaked, coming to life with 
reluctance. 
"Redact House. And quickly." 

The driver whipped up the heilad and they trotted off. The 
carriage drove through the central city and its western suburbs 
before reaching the road that led to the heights. Muriah had 
no city wall. The natural isolation of the Aven Peninsula was 
deemed protection enough here in the southland where the Tanu 
were most powerful. Dedra did not speak and Stein sat stiffly 
at her side, not looking at her. Finally, when they were well 
above the city, the woman said, "There's a fountain ahead. 
Will you let me stop to clean up? If I enter the precincts of the 
redactors looking like this, there are bound to be questions.".Stein nodded and she gave 
instructions to the driver. After 
a few minutes they pulled into a deeply shadowed wayside. 
Some kind of bird was going doink doink among the crags. A 
spring emerged from the yellow limestone into a triple-tiered 
basin and the hellad was permitted to drink from the lowest 
pool, after which Dedra had the driver lead the beast to where 
it could crop from the thick shrubbery. She bathed her face in 
the central basin and produced a small mirror and a golden 
comb, which she used to repair her straggling coiffure. The 
ornate headdress was badly crushed. After a futile attempt to 
restore it, she threw it into a waste receptacle. 
"Let some trash collector have a treat. I think my hair will 
do for now, but we'll have to hope Tasha is too stoned to notice 
my gown." 
"Can you stop her reading our minds?" 
Dedra gave a sour little laugh. "Ah! You don't know about 
our dear Tasha-Bybar, the Anastasya Astaurova that was, prime 
benefactress of the Tanu breeding scheme. Well, relax, lover. 
She has no metafaculties at all! Her gold torc is honorary—a 
token of Tanu esteem. Tasha is the human gynecologist who 
first showed the exotics how to reverse our sterilization some 
sixty-odd years ago. There are about a dozen other gut choppers 
doing the work now as well as Tash, of course, but none as 
competent as she is. She does all of the silvers herself. Literally 
keeps the old hand in." 
A picture of the bell-dancer was projected before Stein's 
mental eye. "I've seen a few," he muttered. "But that's a 
different shade of kink!" 
Dedra dipped one hand into the topmost pool of the fountain 
and drank from her cupped palm. "She's quite insane now. 
She must have been borderline when she passed through the 
auberge... Don't give me that old-fashioned masculine look, 
lover! I think she's a traitor to the human race, just as you do. 
But what's done is done. Most of us women make the best of 
it." 
Stein shook his head. "How could she?" 
"There's a crazy kind of logic to i t ... How do you like 
frustrated motherhood for starters? Here's this too dreadfully 
sexy bod that can't grow babies—so why not be a mother by 
proxy? All these perfectly healthy female time-travelers could 
have lovely Tanu children if only some good doctor repaired 
the mischief done by those gyn-folk with the little laser scalpels 
back at the auberge. The fix is quite tricky, because Madame's.people seem to've anticipated some 
kind of jiggery-pokery 
among the philoprogenitive. But dear Tasha perseveres! Finally 
she gets it right, and she passes on her skills to a select squad 
of Tanu students. And here we all are, ready to be plowed and 
planted." 
"If she's such a wiz of a doctor, why doesn't she have one 
of her prize pupils fix her up?" 
"Ah! That's the too-barfmaking tragedy of it all, lover. 

Within that voluptuous female form with the enhanced secondaries 
and the estrogen implants there beats the heart of a true XY." 
Stein glared at her in impatience. "What the hell are you 
talking about?" 
Dedra climbed down from the fountain and sent an impe-rious 
mental command for the carriage. "An XY, lover. Tasha 
is a transsexual. Oh, you could stow away some real woman's 
fertilized egg in her fake uterus, and maybe shoot her full of 
preggy hormones, if you could get them in this primitive world— 
and perhaps the embryo would live a few weeks before dying. 
But that's all, lover. Maternity is a marvelous and tricky sym-biosis. 
And of course, no one in our Galactic Milieu or any-where 
else has ever made a true mother out of a male." 
She stepped lightly into the caleche without assistance. "Well? 
Don't just stand there. Do you want to see your wife, or don't 
you?" Stein climbed in and they rode away. 
When the red and white lights of the Redactor Guild build-ings 
were quite close, Dedra said, "You're going to have to 
be careful when we get inside. Tasha can't read you, but there 
will be plenty of others who can. Heavy screens aren't my 
specialty, although I'll do the best I can for you. But if you 
start thrashing around and break through me it's going to be 
both our asses in a sling." 
"I'll relax," he promised. "Sukey taught me things when 
we—on the trip down the river when we wanted privacy." 
"Trust me," she pleaded. Looking up at him in the dusk, 
she tried to find one small scrap of empathy; but all that mat-tered 
to him was the safety of his precious, funny-faced love. 
"I'm sorry I hurt you," he conceded. But that was all. 
She stared straight ahead at the slouched beanbag shape of 
the old driver. "Think nothing of it. My fault for standing in 
the tornado's path. Lucky little Sukey..." 
The carriage drew up to the entrance. Once again, Stein 
played the solicitous gray-torc esquire and Dedra, the Exalted.Lady. There were two guards in 
garnet-colored half-armor on 
station beneath the portico. A peevish silver male came to escort 
them up to Tasha-Bybar's eyrie. 
"Most unusual," he fretted. "The routine is completely up-set, 
Farspeaking Lady. You know, it was necessary for the 
Lord Healer himself to use his good offices—" 
"We're very grateful to Lord Dionket, Worthy Gordon. It's 
a matter very important to the Venerable Mayvar Kingmaker." 
"Oh, well, of course then. Along through here and up we 
go. Gwen-Minivel will still be groggy, you know. Lady Tasha 
likes them to rest well afterward." 
"I'll bet," growled Stein. He lurched slightly as Dedra ad-ministered 
a psychic correction. 
"We'll not be long, Worthy Gordon. How peaceful it is in 
your precincts at night! It seems we at Farsense House never 
really seem to settle down. In and out, in and out. Someone 
always has an important message or a data-search or a sur-veillance 
or a lost dog or something even more vital. I must 
say, I prefer your tranquil atmosphere." 
"Indispensable in a house of healing," Gordon said. They had reached a landing just below the 
topmost floor of the tower. 
"The recovery rooms are arranged around the perimeter. The 
Candidate Gwen-Minivel is resting in Three." 
"Please don't trouble yourself to wait." Dedra was firm. 
"We'll find our way out, and we'll only stay a very few minutes." 
Gordon received this suggestion dubiously, but after arguing 
with the farspeaker for a few minutes, he bowed and retreated, 

leaving them standing before the door marked 3. Slowly, Dedra slid it open. 
Stein pushed past her into the darkness. "Sue? Are you 
here?" 
Someone moved on a chaise near the open window and sat up, dark against the lights of Muriah 
outside. "Steinie—?" 
He knelt down beside her and took her face between his 
hands. "Have they hurt you? Have they?" 
"Hush, love. No." Gently gently my darling ah how did 
you know? How could you hear me? 
Muffled, he said, "I did and I came." 
You broke Dedra/Mayvar control O Steinlove how did you 
break free how is it possible O mydear so wilduntamedrash-madloving! 
They will not tie me separate us never until I die. 
"Stein," she whispered, and began to weep..From one corner of the darkened room, the one farthest 
from the door, came a small sound. The tinkle of a tiny bell. 
"So you like to spy, too, do you?" Stein's voice was very 
soft. He rose to his feet and stood motionless. 
"So tall! So strong!" The bells shivered up the scale and 
down. One with a lower note began a languorous rhythm. The 
dancer came, fluid as a shadow, and undulated before him. 
"So you want her? How sweet." It was a song the dancer sang, 
accompanied by the suddenly discordant chiming. "You want 
to take her, to take her, to take her!" 
In Stein the white-hot anger was born again, an eruption of 
primitive psychoenergy howling wrath against the mocker and 
her music. Stein uttered a low cry and reached out to stem the 
peril; and Dedra, with her back against the closed door, threw 
her mind against him, too, even though her restraints were even 
weaker than Sukey's against that uniquely masculine tidal bore. 
"Don't, Stein!" Sukey cried aloud. "Oh, don't!" 
"You want to take her," laughed the bell-dancer, bending 
and thrusting. "But why why why? Take her her her?" 
The bell sound and the laughing blended with twisting 
lights—the glittering bits of metal that rippled over white skin, 
the pulse quickening with the danger that made it more sweet— 
and then the music and dance ended in a shuddering finale and 
she opened to him as Dedra moaned and Sukey made one last 
futile try to prevent what was going to happen. 
"Take me" invited Tasha-Bybar. 
And the bronze sword did. 
There was a great silence. Quite calm now, Stein wiped his 
blade on the draperies, sheathed it, and lifted Sukey into his 
arms. He stepped over the thing on the floor. "Get out of the 
way," he told Dedra. 
"You can't!" the farspeaker wailed. Mayvar! Mayvar! 
The door to the corridor opened, admitting a wide swath of 
light. An immensely tall man stood there, flanked by two ser-vitors 
in the scarlet-and-white livery. "I warned Dionket that 
this was a mistake," Creyn said, his tone weary. He came into 
the room, gestured, and turned on festoons of the small cold-light 
lamps. A grim smile played over his lips as he looked 
beyond Stein and Sukey to the fallen dancer. The coarseness 
of his mental comment brought a gasp from Sukey and a sur-prised 
bark of laughter from Stein. 
"You're on our side," marveled the Viking.."Put Sukey down, you great ass," Creyn told him. 
"Thanks 
to you, your wife must be hidden away until the Grand 
Combat... and we'll have to move even faster than we'd origi-nally 
planned.".8 
NODONN SENT THE THUNDERBOLT DOWN INTO THE DARK WATERS 
of the Gulf of Aquitaine, where the wavelets reflected the moon 

and an unsuspecting monster chased a school of tunny not far 
beneath the surface. 
As lightning struck, the sea boiled and belched clouds. Fif-teen 
of the big fish went belly-up, electrocuted instantly. The 
plesiosaur, however, was only stunned. It broke through the 
maelstrom, raised its wattled head, and bellowed. 
"Oh, you got him!" Rosmar cried. "And a big one!" 
"The prey! The prey!" The other Hunters all burst forth into 
radiance, riders and mounts alike, now that there was no longer 
a need for concealment. A wheel of rainbow splendor turned 
in the air above the feebly swimming beast, almost fifty glo-riously 
armored men and women from the court of the Tanu 
Battlemaster. And to one side, aloof as rosy-gold comets, were 
Nodonn himself and his new bride. 
The Hunt whacked shields, sounded crystal horns. "The 
prey! The prey!" 
"To Vrenol," Nodonn decided, his voice storm-loud. 
One of the riders plummeted, trailing sparks, and swooped 
over the brute writhing amid the deadly waves. The snakelike 
neck of the plesiosaur lashed out and the knight hauled his 
chaliko up just in time to escape the dagger teeth. The rider 
thrust with his glowing sword and a ball of purplish fire flew 
from the tip to strike the marine monster between the eyes. 
The animal screamed. 
A cheer was emitted by the circling Hunt. "At him, Vrenol!" 
some woman urged. 
The Huntsman waved his sword in jaunty acknowledg-ment— 
which was a mistake. With its attacker distracted, the.plesiosaur sounded with a simultaneous push 
from all four 
paddlelike limbs, leaving the discomfited Tanu knight poised 
in the air above a surge of evil-smelling bubbles. 
"Oh, hard luck," an anonymous voice drawled. One of the 
armored women blew a derisive triple toot on her animal-headed 
glass trumpet. 
Now Vrenol was faced with the dreadful expedient of pur-suing 
the beast into the water—that element so abhorred by 
his race—if this first attempt at a kill were not to end in 
humiliation as the prey escaped. 
"Ah, the silly young juggins," said Rosmar. "Bring the 
leviathan back up, my Lord!" 
The blazing face of the Battlemaster smiled upon his bride. 
"If you ask it, vein of my heart. But Vrenol deserves to dunk 
for his foolishness." Nodonn reached out to discern the mon-ster's 
position. "Oh, you'd sneak away, would you?" A blue 
bolt of energy split the gulf's water, causing the chalikos of 
the circling Hunt to rear and squeal. The plesiosaur surfaced 
once more and this time Vrenol went for it with his lance. 
"He's got it!" Rosmar exclaimed. "Right at the base of the 
neck! Let's go down for the kill!" 
The Lord and Lady of Goriah spiraled toward the water, 
the wheel of light fracturing respectfully before their passage. 
Now the individual Hunters poised waiting for the end. The 
plesiosaur, paralyzed by the wound, was still able to open and 
close its great jaws slowly. The seven-meter bulk of it wallowed 
amidst spreading bloodstains, lapped by small waves and glis-tening 
from the moonlight and the radiance of the killer hov-ering 
above. 
Vrenol gripped his sword in both hands. The blade flashed 
down. The Hunt cried, "A trophy! A trophy!" One of the ladies 
descended, her lance couched, and with easy expertise pierced 
the floating severed head and hoisted it high. She presented 

the trophy to Vrenol. His glowing form changed from rainbow 
to neon-red and he was off like a scorching bolide to draw 
triumph figures among the stars. 
"Well, he's young," Nodonn observed tolerantly. "We must 
make allowances." But on the command mode of the mental 
speech he warned the others: 
Don't think the rest of you will be permitted such sloppiness! 
These beasts are getting scarce with overhunting and I'll not 
have them wasted..The shining troupe responded: We hear Lord and Battle- master! 
Aloud, Nodonn said, "Then back to Armorica and the Tainted 
Swamp. I require heads from the Firvulag Foe on your lances 
this night, for they are growing bold. And we must find, if we 
can, one of the great armored reptiles. It is urgently needed for the arena in the capital." 
"On with the Hunt!" cried the sparkling riders. They formed a fiery procession again, with the 
scarlet figure of Vrenol now 
leading, and vaulted into the sky on the way to the mainland 
of Brittany. Nodonn and Rosmar followed more slowly. He said to her, 
"There came to me just now a farspoken message from my Lady Mother. You and I must go to 
Muriah—and the reptile 
with us. We will take only a small escort to see to the beast." "You are troubled," she said. 
"It's nothing that can't be dealt with." But his deep thoughts on this matter were heavily 
screened. 
Rosmar lifted the flashing glass helmet from her head and 
hung it from the horn of her saddle. "That's better. The wind 
in my hair! How I love to ride beside you, my daemon lover! Shall I ever learn to fly without your 
help?" 
"In time you may learn. It's a shallow enough trick. We reverence you more for your gentler 
powers." And he smiled 
on her. 
"My powers are for your service," she said. "But tell me what is happening in Muriah." 
"There are matters touching upon our dynastic hopes. I must 
go down to assist other members of the Host of Nontusvel— for our Tanu people only respect the 
display of power." "Is it the Firvulag?" 
"There is a certain Delbaeth," he said, "whom I shall have 
to deal with before another does, shaming our House. But the real danger comes from newly arrived 
humans. Damn the time- gate! When will the others understand its perils?" 
Rosmar laughed. "Do you think we humans should be locked 
out of Exile? Do you think the Tanu could survive without us?" He reined up his steed and halted 
hers, so that the two of 
them drifted a moment in apparently motionless air. The sound 
of surf against the coastal rocks reached them, a faint booming. "Some humans belong in the Many- 
Colored Land. People 
like you, Rosmar, my green-eyed, gray-eyed love, who never 
truly fit into the world of Elder Earth. But not all members of.your race who come through are 
willing to accept the Tanu as 
masters. There are those who'd take the land away from u s ... or 
failing that, destroy it." 
"Let's fight them together!" she said, wild with excitement. 
"Yours is the only world I want to know." Her soul opened to 
the bright Apollo, showing that what she said was true. Their 
two minds embraced in an ardent lifting. 
"My daemon lover," she laughed. 
And he said, "My own Mercy-Rosmar.".9 
JUMP ELIZABETH. She stood on the headland above the White Silver Plain, 
looking down on the phantom cavalry of cloud shadows racing 
there on the empty moonlit salt. At the rim of the grassy terrace 
was a low railing. Beyond that a few stunted, picturesquely 
deformed pines at the precipice edge overhung a sheer drop of 
perhaps 100 meters to the Mediterranean abyss. 
Jump Elizabeth jump to peace. 
"Do you hear it?" she asked Brede. 

A dark shape sitting on a stone bench stirred. Its topheavy 
headdress with the padded brim inclined in agreement. 
"They're farwatching me from the palace," Elizabeth con-tinued. 
"See what happens when I approach the brink—" 
Jumpjumpjump! Be free abandoned onlyoneofkind! Poor-forlorn 
thing Elizalonelybeth. Jump to release. Escape undes-ecrated 
while yet possible. Jump... 
Palms resting on the balustrade, she leaned far out. Night 
winds brought the scent of the distant lagoon to mingle with 
the orange blossoms of Brede's garden. Out here on the land's 
end of Aven, far from any freshwater influx that would en-courage 
simple algae and hardy crustaceans to flourish, there 
was no fishy-iodine smell of marine life—only the bitter alkali 
of the Empty Sea. 
Elizabeth said, "They worked on me all afternoon while I 
was locked in my suite, trying to set up what they thought 
would be an appropriate emotional basis for the suicide im-pulse. 
Trading mostly on motifs of despair and dignity-threat, 
mixed with a good dollop of old-fashioned funk. But their 
whole foundation is spurious. The motivations are unacceptable 
to my metapsychic ethic. If they'd gone for the self-sacrificing.altruism angle they'd have been 
nearer the mark—not that that 
would have worked, given this exile situation." 
Brede's mental voice, so formal and lacking in the elisions 
and concatenations of ordinary mindspeech, said: 
The masterclass metapsychics of your Milieu embraced a 
common ethical formula? 
Elizabeth let amiable affirmation shine through the barrier 
she had maintained between herself and the Shipspouse since 
her first meeting with the exotic woman two hours earlier. 
"Most of us followed a system consonant with the philosophy 
of an evolving theosphere. Are you familiar with this concept? 
With the major religions of the later human era?" 
I have studied your people since their first timefaring. Some 
of their professed philosophies have dismayed and repelled me. 
You must understand that the Tanu embrace a simple, unstruc-tured 
monotheism without any priesthood or established hier-archy. 
We have been quite willing to grant religious freedom 
to those humans whose faith was nonmilitant. But there have 
been zealots who persisted in disrupting the King's peace— 
bareneck ones, of course—and these were speedily granted 
the martyrdom they subconsciously craved ... But none of the 
humans I have studied was able to shed light on the Unity of 
your Galactic Milieu. And this is understandable, for only a 
true metapsychic can know it. In humility I request that you 
enlighten me. 
"What you ask is virtually impossible, Brede. A young meta 
usually begins training before birth. The mental enlargement 
is intensified in early childhood—this is the kind of work I 
devoted my life to before my accident. A person with master-class 
potential must expect to spend thirty years or more adapt-ing 
to the full Unity. Enlighten you?...You invited me to 
inspect your intellectual potential and I'll agree that psycho-union 
between us two is not utterly impossible. But that torc of 
yours presents a wall and a snare all at once. You think of 
yourself as operant. But, believe me—you aren't. Not truly. 
And without genuine metafunction you can't know the Unity 
or any of the rest of Milieu essence." 
The calm thought came: It is foreseen that one day my people 
will partake of this essence. 
"Foreseen by whom?" 

By me. 
Elizabeth came away from the railing and stood in front of 
the Shipspouse. Upon their first encounter Brede had revealed.that she belonged to a race 
different from that of the other 
exotics. She was of less than medium height, with eyes that 
were carnelian-brown instead of blue or green. Her face, the 
lower part exposed now that she had once again removed her 
baroque respirator, lacked the preternatural beauty of the ruling 
Tanu race but was comely enough, appearing middle-aged. 
Brede wore a gown of metallic red fabric that was styled in a 
different manner from the thin flowing robes of the Tanu. It 
was trimmed with red-and-black beading and over it she wore 
a black coat with trailing bell sleeves and borders of red flame-shapes. 
Her huge chapeau, also black and red, was aglitter with 
jewels and had a black veil floating from it. The costume, 
except for the ornate breathing equipment, reminded Elizabeth 
of one of the tapestries from the Middle Ages that had adorned 
the grand salon back at l'Auberge du Portail. There was an 
archaic aura about the Shipspouse, a flavor of something con-spicuously 
absent from the other exotics. Brede was no bar-barian, 
no oracle, no priest-mother. All of Elizabeth's attempts 
at analyzing her had thus far proved futile. 
"Tell me what you want from me," the human woman said. 
"Tell me who you really are." 
The Shipspouse lifted her bowed head, revealing a sweet, 
patient smile. For the first time, Brede voiced her thoughts 
aloud. 
"Why will you not mindspeak with me, Elizabeth?" 
"It would be imprudent of me. You're more formidable than 
the others. As both of us know." 
Brede rose from the bench. Her breath began to come pain-fully 
again and she raised the respirator for relief. "This at-mosphere— 
so suitable for my Tanu and Firvulag people—is 
rarified for one of my stock. Will you come inside my home? 
The oxygen is enriched within, and we can also seclude our-selves 
in my room without doors, and these hostile minds will 
no longer be able to weary you with their importunities." 
Jump Elizabeth! Don't let Twoface Brede fool you take you 
from onlyescape. She worst of usall! Go back cliffside and 
jump jump... 
"The compulsion is getting rather annoying," Elizabeth 
agreed. "But I'm capable of dealing with it." 
"The attack of the Host represents no threat to you?" 
"In order for their compulsion to work, it would have to be 
strong enough to completely override my superego and will. 
They'd almost have to dismember my personality and reinte-.grate it on a lower, complaisant level. 
There's a crowd of them 
pecking at me now and the directing intelligences are respect-ably 
strong. But none of them—not severally and not working 
together—can summon the power to compel my suicide. Who 
are they? Can you recognize any of them?" 
"The four directors are leaders among Nontusvel's Host. 
The PK adept is Kuhal, Second Lord Psychokinetic to Nodonn. 
Imidol is the coercer, a battle-champion with small mental 
subtlety. The farsensor is Riganone, a female warrior who sees 
herself as the successor to Mayvar—an amusing conceit! The 
fourth, the redactor, represents a more serious challenge, al-though 
perhaps not in the compulsive mode. He is Culluket, 
the King's Interrogator, whose loyalty lies with his mother 
Nontusvel and her Host rather than with his father, the Thagdal. 
Culluket's faculties for deep-probe and mind alteration are sec-ond 

only to those of Dionket the Lord Healer. But healing is 
not the work for which Culluket is known. It would not be 
wise for you to encounter him at close range until you are 
conversant with certain aggressive techniques in use among our 
less principled element." 
"Thanks for the warning. A perverted redactor might be 
able to get into my autonomic nervous system while I was 
asleep or emotionally distraught. I'll have to spin a special 
stem-shield—maybe a trap, too. We had problems along this 
line many years ago in the Milieu, before the Unity had reached 
full maturation, with all human metapsychics assenting to the 
common moral imperative. The self-defensive maneuvers are 
still taught to young metas.. .just in case." 
The compulsion now built to a near-hysterical crescendo as 
Elizabeth walked at Brede's side on the path through the orange 
grove. There were lurid threats of Tanu gang-rape and muti-lation; 
visions of suffering, exploited daughters yet unborn; 
wheedlings that promised death-peace and a reuniting with 
Lawrence; even—belatedly—logical arguments for self-de-struction 
based on the genetic ramifications of the situation. 
Elizabeth turn back! Better for you for allhumans in Exile 
allTanu as well if you die! Don't listen Twoface Shipspider-spouse 
lies! Turn back and jump! Jump! 
There were oranges on the ground, for Brede was not served 
by ramas. The distinctive smell of citrus-mold blended with 
the flower perfume; the trees carried blossoms simultaneously 
with the fruit. Elizabeth reached up and picked a pendant globe. 
The mental voices keened at ultimate strength: Don't! Don't.turn away from release! Don't lose 
opportunity Elizabeth! Es-cape 
impossible within roomwithoutdoors! Turn back! Jump! 
Turn back... 
BE GONE. 
(Bubblesnapripplequench.) (Withdrawal.) 
Brede's amplified voice said, "Now they know you were 
fully aware of their attack." 
"They had to find out sooner or later. I prefer sooner." 
"They'll try again. More of them. Queen Nontusvel has 
more than two hundred surviving children." 
"Let them try! The compulsion-aggression would be inef-fective 
if they amplified their efforts a thousandfold. Your 
people and their torcs! They don't achieve true mental synergy 
at all! They can't marshal the proper force behind a multimind 
thrust. They're primitive and sloppy—out of phase and out of 
focus. And out of their league, if you follow my idiom." 
O cruel in aloof superiority O proud Elizabeth. 
She paid no attention to the unspoken reproach. It had been 
an irritating day. As they walked toward the small white villa, 
Elizabeth peeled the orange and ate the small segments. The 
flesh of the fruit was dark in the moonlight, adding another 
brick to the edifice of her indignation: It was a blood orange. 
Elizabeth's voice was snappish as she said, "You won't gel 
anywhere being subtle with me, Brede. I never was much good 
at diplomatic byplay, even back in the Milieu. I want to know 
whose side you're on and what expectations you have of me. 
And just what is this room without doors?" 
"You need have no fear of it. It cannot hold one such as 
you. But it will keep the Host away from you, body and soul, 
for as long as you remain within its sanctuary. I had hoped 
that you would stay with me. We could... teach one another. 
There is ample time, nearly two months before the Combat, 
where I foresee a climactic resolution." 

The last pieces of orange rind fell from Elizabeth's hand. 
She slowed as they came out onto a small patch of lawn in 
front of the villa. Brede's house bore none of the usual Tanu 
faerie lights, but stood in Grecian simplicity framed by cy-presses. 
It was a dwelling fit for the mystery woman, lacking 
any exterior openings. 
The half-masked face of the Shipspouse looked up at her, 
entreating. It seemed to say: More than all the rest, we two 
are exiled.."What happens if our attempted meeting of minds is un-successful?" 
Elizabeth inquired. 
"Then you will do what you must." Brede was apparently 
unperturbed. "Shall we go in together?" Side by side, the two of them crossed the grass, came onto 
the pillared porch of the little house, and passed through the 
smooth marble wall. 
Into peace. Elizabeth could not help letting a great sigh escape her lips. 
Mental as well as physical silence enveloped her—the kind that had once provoked such anguish back 
at the Metapsychic 
Institute on Denali, where the therapists had tried in vain to 
reestablish contact with her regenerated brain. But now—how 
welcome the stillness! It brought surcease from the background noise of all those lesser psyches 
that had mumbled and squealed 
and droned and piped their thin discordancies even when they 
were not actually reaching out in childish insolence or daring 
a frontal attack against her very ramparts. They couldn't reach 
her, of course; but there was still the battering... In the Milieu, 
such mental static was shut out by the overwhelming harmony of the Unity. Here, until now, there 
had been relief from it 
only in that cocoon of fire that was the last terrible refuge of 
a suffering, self-centered soul. 
But this— "Do you like my room?" asked Brede. 
"I do," said Elizabeth. Both her mind and countenance smiled. 
The exotic woman lowered her respirator. "There is an el-evated 
partial pressure of oxygen here, which promotes eu- phoria. But the mental stillness is the most 
precious attribute of this room without doors. We two may reach out, but none 
may enter." The exterior of the villa had been modest, with classic per-pendicular 
lines; but the walls inside curved and arched away into immense distances. They were midnight-blue 
with ever-changing 
fragile patterns of faint carmine and silver, reminis- cent of oil-sheen on deep water. There were 
pictures— 
projections, rather—of two deep-space vistas: a barred-spiral 
galaxy trailing two great arms, and a planet whose landmasses wrinkled into high mountains, having 
blue seas in rounded 
basins resembling lunar maria. 
The furnishings of the room were simple, nearly invisible because they were made of the same dark 
stuff as the walls..There were a few chests, shelves holding colored glass cyl-inders 
with magnetic imprints that were Tanu audiovisuals, a 
pair of long couches, several featureless cubes the size of foot-stools. 
Hovering at eye level against one wall was a small piece 
of sculpture, an abstraction of a female figure. Three blue lights 
were ranged around it. In the center of the room (or what might 
have been the center, if the walls had not approached or receded 
as one concentrated on them or ignored them) stood the most 
striking piece of decor: a low oval table that glowed milky 
white, flanked by two dark padded benches. On the table was 
a glass model that Elizabeth assumed represented some intricate 
protist organism such as a marine radiolarian. 
"An image of my Ship," Brede explained. "Let us be seated 
and I will begin the sharing by telling you of our journey." 
"Very well." Barriers firm, Elizabeth sat with clasped hands, 
looking not at the Shipspouse and her room of wonders but at 
the small diamond ring on her own right hand. 

Aeons ago in our distant galaxy [Brede said] there lived a 
sentient race on a single small planet orbiting a yellow sun. 
When this race first achieved a written history it had but a 
single body form and a single mental pattern. With the passing 
of millennia it developed a high technology and the gravo-magnetic 
transport, which enables vessels to travel at velocities 
approaching that of light without being restricted by the limi-tations 
of inertia. Suitable planets within practical range were 
colonized and a federation established. But then there was an 
interstellar war, and for long years the shattered colonies were 
separated from their mother-planet not only by the gulfs of 
space but also by a profound deterioration of culture. One 
daughter-world alone—my own planet of Lene—retained lim-ited 
space-travel capability, using primitive reaction engines 
for brief forays into its own solar system. 
Back on the mother-planet, which was called Duat, the great 
war had provoked melancholy changes. Damage to the land 
and atmosphere led to climatic alterations. The high mountains 
became a wilderness of snow; the precipitous valleys, though 
semitropical, were largely overcast and foggy. Over a thousand 
generations, the native people evolved two body forms, both 
different from the parent stock that had colonized the daughter-worlds 
so many years before. 
The upland race, the Firvulag, dwelt in wintry austerity for 
most of the year. They were mostly small in stature and phys-.ically tough. Their culture was 
simple, with the technological 
conservatism and cooperative social patterns that often prevail 
in harsh environments. Isolated for long periods in their snow-bound 
caves, they consoled themselves not merely with handi-crafts 
but more especially with mental diversions designed to 
preserve sanity. They developed the ability to conjure enter-taining 
visions and pseudomaterial manifestations, as well as 
many other refinements of the psychoenergetic metafunction 
that you of the Milieu term "creativity." They also achieved a 
form of farspeech and farsight that enabled them to contact 
distant brethren without venturing into the deadly storms. The 
Firvulag became true, if limited, metapsychics, and they pros-pered. 
Meanwhile, in the lowlands of this same Duat, a second 
racial type flourished—tall and slender and pale-skinned, with 
light-sensitive eyes, as was suitable in a warm climate with 
heavily overcast skies. This ancestral Tanu population struggled 
slowly back to a level of high technology. They never evolved 
into operant metafunction, as the Firvulag did; instead they 
developed the mental amplifier you know as the golden torc, 
which made their latent metafunctions imperfectly operant and 
gave them a crude but satisfying simulacrum of psychounity— 
the "mind-family" relationship that you have observed among 
our people and among the golds and silvers and grays of this 
Many-Colored Land... 
There was always a strong strain of aggression in the people 
of biracial Duat. The Tanu and Firvulag were perennial antag-onists, 
although neither group wreaked more than superficial 
damage upon the other because of a reluctance to penetrate far 
into enemy territory. The ritual battles became the basis for a 
simple religion that prevailed for another sixty generations— 
until Duat was contacted once again by explorers from the 
reborn Interstellar Federation. 
Yes.. .we regained the stars, we daughter-worlds. While 
our ancient home-planet went its separate and peculiar way, 
we rediscovered the gravo-magnetic drive. But there was more! 
We entered into a wonderful symbiosis with the titanic sentient 

organisms that came to be called Ships. They were capable of 
superluminal travel through the exercise of their own minds, 
generating what you would call upsilonfields by means of a 
unique ultrasense. If the Ships were suitably motivated, they 
would carry a thousand or more of our people along with them 
in an implanted capsule, soaring to the uttermost parts of our.galaxy in minutes—hours, at most. 
As you may have already 
guessed, the Ships could be motivated only by love. And each 
Ship that served us had as Spouse a woman of my race. 
The dimorphic population of Duat was welcomed into our 
federation. Their golden torcs proved to be compatible with 
the minds of many, but by no means all, of the people living 
on the former colonial worlds. A torc-wearing elite came to 
power; and after only four generations, our confederation was 
experiencing a Golden Age of cultural and technoeconomic 
expansion. 
Like all Golden Ages, ours came to an end. Descendants 
of the original Tanu and Firvulag, who were zealous endoga-mists, 
carried their ancient enmities to the stars, precipitating 
a new series of ruinous wars. After much suffering, peace was 
restored; but our federation decreed that the remnant of Firvulag 
and Tanu purebloods must abjure the battle-religion and mingle 
their genes so that the basis for the old hatred would be oblit-erated. 
Most of the dimorphic population eventually agreed to 
this. But one diehard segment refused and demanded the right 
to emigrate to another galaxy. This request was denied and 
their unconditional surrender required. They fled, only a thou-sand 
Tanu and Firvulag, to a remote world near the tip of one 
spiral arm, where they prepared to battle to the death among 
themselves in a last gesture of apocalyptic defiance. 
One person only was sympathetic to their original plea for 
exile. This woman was blessed—or afflicted—with more than 
the ordinary Shipspouse's share of the metafaculty of prolepsis. 
You would call this prescience or foresight. She foresaw that 
the small mob of malcontents, so useless in their own galaxy, 
would have a catalytic effect in another star-whirl younger and 
less mentally evolved, where the great longevity and mental 
power of the exiles would have a beneficial influence on the 
slowly coalescing local Mind. The vision was a cloudy one. 
But it was sufficient to inspire this person to offer the services 
of herself and her Ship to carry the exiles away... 
Thus we came. 
And the human time-travelers came. 
And you came. 
"At this point," Brede admitted, "my prescience fails me. 
The arrival of people from Earth's distant future gave me great 
concern, upsetting as it did the Tanu-Firvulag balance of power 
that had prevailed up until about seventy years ago. I still have.not fully assessed the impact. 
The survey now being conducted 
by your friend Bryan will possibly provide data necessary for 
my ultimate judgment—although neither King Thagdal nor any 
of the rest have thought deeply on what would have to be done 
should the verdict be unfavorable to further human participa- tion." "Humanity," said Elizabeth, 
"occupies a similarly equivocal 
position among the coadunate races of the Galactic Milieu." 
"The human advent has brought about many advantageous 
changes—and not merely technoeconomic and eugenic. Fac-tions 
among both the Firvulag and Tanu—especially hybrid 
Tanu—have begun to weary of the traditional contention and 
reach out toward a more civilized philosophy. It may well be 
that the assimilation of latent humanity into the Tanu population 

is a desirable thing. But you—!" 
"No anthropological survey will assess my impact." 
"Perhaps it is appropriate that you contribute your priceless 
heritage to our racial evolution at this point. The Thagdal be-lieves 
this, as do Eadone Sciencemaster, Aluteyn the Lord 
Creator, Sebi-Gomnol, and a number of others among our Great 
Ones. But you and your genes for operant metafunction might 
just as easily be a potential lethal factor—as the Host of Non-tusvel 
perceives you. What is to be done? I am at a loss to 
know how to proceed." 
Slowly, Elizabeth rotated the diamond ring on her finger. 
"Some other would-be manipulators of humans have known 
the feeling.".10 
ISOLATED FROM THE MAINLAND ON ITS LONG PENINSULA AS the Tanu capital was, its citizens were 
restricted in their ability to engage in Hunts. Long before humans came to the Many-Colored 
Land, all Firvulag had been exterminated or driven 
from Aven; citizens hankering for blood sport had either to travel to the Iberian mainland or 
content themselves with the 
organized events that took place in Muriah's huge open-air 
arena or at the Plain of Sports, a great green field northwest 
of the city that was laid out with grand- and petit-prix race- courses. In addition to the thriceweekly 
contests, there was 
held midway in each month, excepting those of the Grand 
Combat and the flanking Truce, a much larger Sport Meeting 
that attracted contestants and spectators from all parts of south- ern Europe. 
It was at the September Sport Meeting that Aiken Drum and his man-at-arms Stein Oleson were 
ordered to demonstrate their 
newly acquired martial skills. If the two of them passed muster 
in the arena, they would be allowed to participate in the Del- baeth Quest—which was now scheduled 
to-be conducted by 
the King himself. After frantic maneuvering on the part of the 
Queen and her Host, it was decided that not only Aiken but also Nodonn Battlemaster, Lord of 
Goriah, would pursue the 
elusive monster under Thagdal's designated agency. All of the 
noble sports fans who could manage to get away would ac- company the expedition to Spain to watch 
the fun, 
Opening odds on Aiken to take the Shape of Fire were 300 
to 1. 
A nasty driving rain swept over Aven on Meeting Night. A 
team of PK stalwarts led by Nodonn's twin brothers Fian Sky-breaker 
and Kuhal Earthshaker mobilized efforts to deflect the.downpour from the stadium by means of 
psychic energies. It 
was expected that the Battlemaster himself would arrive at the 
capital in time to witness the testing of the Candidate Aiken 
and his Viking henchman. 
In the royal box awaiting the parade of contestants, Queen 
Nontusvel glanced up at a crooked discharge of natural light-ning 
that flashed above the transparent roof generated by the 
psychokinetics. 
"Such unusual weather for this time of year. I hope Nodonn 
and dear Rosmar won't be delayed." She turned to Eadone 
Sciencemaster who sat beside her, austere in unadorned silver. 
"Gomnol theorizes that our Flying Hunts may be disrupting 
the ozone layer and changing the climate." 
"Twaddle," said Eadone, secure in her position as Dean of 
Guilds and eldest child of the King. "It's nothing but a freak 
storm. Perhaps the remnant of some tropical cyclone from the 
South Atlantic that managed to cross the Gibraltar Isthmus." 
"Let's hope so, August Daughter," boomed Thagdal. "If 
this rain settles in to stay, it'll mean poor sport for our Delbaeth 
Quest. The old Shape of Fire might just stay home in his cave 

with his pipe and slippers if the crops at the plantations get all 
soggy and nonflammable. We'll have a devil of a time tracking 
him if he stays underground." 
"Here's Bryan!" exclaimed the Queen. She now spoke in 
Standard English, a courtesy followed by all of the Tanu Great 
Ones in the presence of the torcless anthropologist. "And Greggy, 
and the Craftsmaster, too! Quite drenched, poor things. Alu-teyn, 
darling! Couldn't your PK cope?" 
"I'm a creator, Awful Lady, not an umbrella merchant," 
grumped the stout old Craftsmaster. "What's wrong with a little 
rain, anyhow? We Tanu ought to stiffen up and shake our silly 
water phobia. Whoever drowned in the rain?" 
Bryan bowed to the royal couple. "It wasn't at all bad until 
we were forced to make a run from our carriage to the arena 
entrance. There are so many people here tonight that the ramas 
holding canopies over the new arrivals kept tangling up with 
one another." 
Someone giggled, a sound approximating that of a strangling 
bantam chicken. A human male in a golden torc, wearing a 
clawhammer cutaway in the colors of the Creator Guild, stum-bled 
moistly toward the King and Queen, spattering the other 
occupants of the royal box as he waved his arms in greeting..His marmoset face was full of blithe 
innocence; he seemed to 
be about sixty years old. 
"Aluteyn spun us an illusion of dryness!" this personage 
declaimed, executing a kind of curtsy that ended just short of 
his pitching over the rail into the arena. "But can illusion ever 
mimic truth? Especially when a canopy full of water tilts 
and—" 
"Oh, shut up, Greggy," said the Craftsmaster, looking tired. 
"It's been a long day, Great Ones," he told the King and Queen. 
"And did you take good care of Bryan? Show him all the 
wondrous secrets of your Guild?" The good Queen's solicitude 
warmed all three of the arrivals and dried their wet feet. 
"A most impressive tour," Bryan said. "The facilities for 
training artists and scientists reminded me of certain universities 
of my own era. And of course Lord Greg-Donnet conducted 
me around the research laboratories of his own Genetics De-partment—" 
"And wasn't it marvelous? Wasn't it?" The former Gregory 
Prentice Brown gave a small skip and clapped his hands. "I 
can't tell you what a joy it is chatting with a colleague who 
could fill me in on some of the latest developments of Milieu 
science! Do you realize, Majesties, that the percentage of op-erant 
metapsychics among last year's newborn humans in the 
Galactic Milieu has risen from two to four? I simply must replot 
my study of the latency coefficients! I had based my original 
prognosis on the assumption that the population was in equi-librium 
... but Grenfell says it's not! The implications are enor-mous." 
"I'm sure they are, Greggy dear," said the Queen. "Do sit 
down and relax. Look—here come the clowns!" 
"Oh, goody!" Lord Greg-Donnet cried. "I hope the explod-ing 
one is here tonight." He plumped down onto a seat and 
appropriated a plateful of finger-bananas from the royal snack 
table, eating them skin and all. 
Eadone asked Bryan, "Is what Greggy says true?" 
"I should think so, Lady Sciencemaster." 
She frowned. "But for a replot, we'll need the computer." 
"But we have the computer," Bryan said. "Ogmol and I 
have been using it to store our data." 
With some stiffness, Aluteyn said, "The kid fixed it." 
"Tana's toenails!" exclaimed the delighted King. "Maybe I 

misjudged Aiken!".The Queen sat watching the cavorting entertainers with a 
fixed smile. 
"Aiken Drum has been busy about many things," the Crafts-master 
continued in a voice heavy with irony. "He was able 
to show some of my people at the glass works how to restore 
the large annealing machine. He and Gomnol have been con-ferring 
on ways to improve the mental-assay device—which 
as you know has always been dismayingly fragile. And he has 
also introduced the vulgar nobility to kite fighting and three-dimensional 
chess. The new diversions have swept Muriah in 
the past two weeks." 
"H'm," mused the King. He did not look delighted any 
more. 
"Oh, the animals!" Greggy squealed. "Just look at that gi-gantopithecine! 
Will he fight? Will he?" 
"Not to the death, darling," the Queen said. "We must save 
him for the Grand Combat. But there'll be elephants, and giant 
bear-dogs from the Catalonian Wilderness. And—look there, 
in that wagon. Another new monster! Isn't it dreadful? Like a 
cross between a sabertooth and a huge hyena!" 
"Hyainailouros," Eadone said. "Another specimen brought 
back by the African expedition. The last delayed shipment 
arrived today." 
Now there was a flourish of brass and tympani, punctuated 
by thunderclaps. The night's contestants paraded forth: first 
the lesser grays on foot, wearing different kinds of gladiatorial 
gear; then the higher-ranked grays, the silvers, and the human 
and Tanu gold-torcs in resplendent glass armor of many colors 
and styles. The chaliko steeds they rode were also armored and 
trapped richly, and many of the animals had their coats dyed 
yellow or crimson or blue. 
The applause of the throng swelled almost to the pain thresh-old. 
Through the entrance and into the arena came two riders, 
side by side. One was a gigantic human male riding a coppery-red 
chaliko. His full armor was crystalline green studded with 
roundels and spikes of glittering topaz. The visor of the horned 
emerald helmet was up and Stein grinned at the shrieking fans 
and smote his shield with the flat of a huge vitredur axe. Beside 
the Viking rode a diminutive figure who seemed all plated in 
gold, astride a great black mount. As the ladies began to throw 
flowers he gave a bound and stood upright in his saddle, bearing 
aloft a lance from which floated a long purple pennon with a 
golden symbol on it.."A banner with a strange device," Bryan murmured. "Is 
that charge really a digitus impudicus?" 
"The Venerable Mayvar," said the Queen in a neutral tone, 
"allowed her Candidate to choose his own armorial bearings. 
Am I right in presuming that the hand-gesture motif represents a certain raffish defiance?" 
"Your Majesty is quite correct," said Bryan, keeping a straight 
face. 
The parade now ranged in a great circle all around the arena. 
The Marshal of Sport and the Lord of Swords entered last of 
all, together with their attendants and the corps of referees. 
When these functionaries came to the great fenced stairway in 
front of the royal box, they made their duty to Thagdal and 
Nontusvel and led both contestants and spectators in a loud 
salute. 
Thagdal's mind and voice bellowed: "Let the games begin!" 
The audience settled down while the principal fighters and 
animals retired to sideline areas. Preliminary events and circus 
acts began to warm things up. The King asked Bryan, "How 
does your survey go, Worthy Doctor?" 

"I've gathered a considerable body of data, as Lord Ogmol 
has doubtless reported." 
The King nodded. "Oggy's fighting tonight, but he tells me 
you've been running him all over town—and into the coun-tryside." 
"It's important to include agriculture, especially since it has 
become your policy to delegate operation of the plantations 
entirely to humans. I was surprised to find so many torcless 
workers employed in nonmenial positions. It's interesting that 
most of them seem productive and happy." 
"Were you surprised to discover that, Bryan?" inquired the 
Queen. She took a napkin and dipped it into a goblet of white 
wine, then wiped mashed fruit pulp from Lord Greg-Donnet's 
face. The Genetics Master smiled adoringly at her. 
"The apparent assimilation is significant. I understand that 
malcontents are relatively few—at least in the Aven area. Will 
I be allowed to compare these data with similar surveys of other 
metropolitan regions—say, Goriah, and Finiah?" 
"Unfortunately," the King said, "there will not be time. We 
will require your completed analysis before the Grand Combat. 
You must make do with the material you're able to gather here— 
even if it does tend to be loaded with positive factors." 
"We gather the creme de la creme of humanity for Muriah,".said Greggy, looking smug. "Hardly 
anybody runs away down here. Not even the women. I mean—where could they go?" 
"Kersic, mostly," said Eadone. She applauded an exhibition 
of roping and hog-tying of elk-sized antelope, performed by cowboys in orange lame. To Bryan, she 
explained, "That's an 
island east of here. In your future world it has split into Corsica and Sardinia." 
"And the—outlaws live there?" 
"A few," the King said, waving a dismissive hand. "Gangs 
of sickly bandits preying on each other. Every few years we 
mount a Hunt and clean them out. Not much sport, though." 
"Look! Look! The hoe-tuskers!" The Genetics Master, and 
most of the rest of the crowd, jumped up and down and screamed. 
Handlers with long goads brought on six colossal proboscideans 
with downcurving tusks. The largest stood nearly four meters 
high at the shoulder. Tanu knights afoot, armed only with 
vitredur lances bearing large banners, performed an exotic cor-rida 
with the animals. One luckless fighter botched a pase and 
was trampled. The rainbow blaze of his unbroken armor dulled 
abruptly, as though a switch had been thrown. 
Greg-Donnet tittered. "Snapped his neck. Well—there's 
one for Dionket's baggie-bin!" 
The Queen told the appalled Bryan, "He will be restored, 
dear boy, never fear. We're a very tough race, you know. But 
that poor fellow will be sidelined for the Grand Combat while 
he heals within the Skin. He's lost great prestige by being so clumsy." 
The deinotheria and the surviving knights retired to ap-plause. 
"None of the animals are to be killed?" Bryan asked. 
"There will be only two battles to the death tonight," said 
the Queen. "Ah. That's the end of that. And now..." 
An elaborate blast of brasses sounded. The Marshal of Sport 
came to the steps in front of the royal box and Aluteyn translated 
his announcement for Bryan. 
"Be pleased, Awful Majesties, to accept the homage of the 
Novice-at-Arms Stein Oleson, loyal servant of the Candidate 
Aiken Drum!" 
Stein cantered out on his chaliko, rode up to the steps, 
lowered his long-hafted glass axe, and saluted by touching his 
gray torc. The cheers were loud but tentative. When the King 
arose and made a gesture, the crowd fell silent. 
Stein turned his mount to face the chosen antagonist. Animal.handlers on the other side of the 

arena opened a stout gate on 
the wheeled cage that held the hyainailouros. 
The beast seemed to flow across the pocked and stained 
expanse of sand. It had the snakey neck and relatively small 
head of a polar bear. Its body, however, bulked at least twice 
as large as that of the unborn ursid. The hyainailouros might 
have weighed a ton or more; it moved with speed and agility, 
flattening its large rounded ears against its head and heading 
directly for Stein in a kind of galloping slither. The animal's 
mouth hung wide open, displaying a pair of oversized upper 
canines that were longer than Stein's mailed hand. 
"Oooh!" shrilled Lord Greg-Donnet. 
Following the obligatory etiquette of the arena, Stein came 
at a gallop to meet the creature, swerving aside at the last 
second to whack it on the rump, en passant, with the flat of 
his glass axe. It whirled, giving a kind of hissing hoot, and 
slashed with one clawed forefoot, then the other. Stein returned 
to count more coups, attacking and retreating, smacking the 
animal on flanks, back, neck—even gently tapping its flat 
skull. The hyainailouros spun about in a frenzy, trying to dis-embowel 
the chaliko or catch the tormenting rider in its gnash-ing 
jaws. The spectators greeted each coup with a roar of 
approbation. Finally, when the sabertoothed beast was begin-ning 
to reel with vertigo and frustration, scattered voices among 
the fans started to shout: "A kill! A kill!" Stein spurred his mount and galloped in a tight 
circle around 
the swaying creature, which had risen to its hind legs. It uttered 
a series of short, high-pitched bleats, like demon laughter. 
Thagdal stood up once more and gestured. 
"A kill!" howled the crowd in unison. 
And then there was silence, except for the thud of the chal-iko's 
clawed feet as Stein guided it away from the hyainail-ouros, 
and the rasping exhalations of the winded prey waiting 
for its enemy to return. Stein dismounted. At the end of his 
axe was a stout lanyard; the advancing Viking began to swing 
the weapon by this cord, whirling it around and around his 
horned head. He approached the now rampant brute with every 
facet of his armor aglitter and the rotating vitredur blade all 
but invisible. Then he sprang, his body's trajectory timed to 
coincide with the swaying of the sabertoothed prey, and scythed 
its head off. 
The spectators erupted in a mental and vocal tumult, shout- ing, clapping, and stamping. Thagdal 
opened a wicket in the.front of the box and descended the stairway that led into the 
arena. Down below, the Marshal's attendants threw wide 
the gate in the protective fence so that Stein could approach 
the sovereign. The Viking took off his emerald helmet and 
clumped forward. 
And then the crowd gasped. From the other side of the stadium came thundering a black steed 
bearing a small rider 
armored in gold-lustred glass. Just as Stein paused in front of the King, Aiken Drum reined up in 
a sliding halt scarcely a 
meter behind his "servant," grinning like the personification of Jack O'Lantern. 
"And he did it all himself!" the jester said. "No assists from 
mighty Me!" 
The Marshal of Sport had been obliged to act fast with his 
PK to keep the great dust cloud Aiken had generated from enveloping the disconcerted King. Now the 
official stepped forward and declaimed: "Pray silence for the accolade of His 
Awful Majesty!" 
"Yeah," said Stein, giving Aiken a look. "You'll get your 
chance." 
Thagdal produced a large chained medallion embossed with the heraldic male face. He raised it. As 

the crowd cried, "Slon-shal!" 
he hung it around Stein's neck. 
"Accept this our accolade, and be forever our faithful man-atarms." 
The people cheered, and Queen Nontusvel sent down a 
napkin threaded through a magnificent ruby thumb ring (Stein didn't mind at all that it was a 
little messy with banana), and 
the Tanu ladies exuded concupiscence, and very guarded hos-tility 
emanated from the Tanu gentlemen, and a hostler brought Stein's chaliko to him, and he rode away. 
Aiken followed after, 
broadcasting, "That's my boy!" on a highly amplified farspeech 
mode. 
When Thagdal returned to the box there was a distinct at-mosphere 
of jovian pique. "Now, Thaggy," soothed the Queen. "Didn't you love it?" Greggy squealed. 
A great crack of thunder rang out. "My sentiments exactly," 
growled the High King of the Many-Colored Land. "You will all excuse me. I am going for a royal 
leak." 
"He doesn't really care for humans, you know." Lord Greg- Donnet's cheery infant face was 
illuminated by momentary sanity. "No more than you do, my Queen, and all your Host..The King 
endures humanity as a necessary evil. But you would 
rather the timegate had never opened." 
"Shame on you, Greggy," said Nontusvel. "Some of my 
best friends are human. You mustn't talk like that, naughty 
boy. What will Bryan think? Here—have a nice hard-boiled 
egg." The Genetics Master took the proffered silver dish and stared 
into it, apparently puzzled. "Eggs? Eggs? But they, dearest 
Lady, are the matter of contention! A quarter of a million of 
them tucked within her human ovaries! So generous, so waste-ful, 
so providential of Mother Nature to stuff every human 
female with such a superabundance of ova!" He peered side-ways 
at Bryan, took up an egg and dipped it into a jar of Grey 
Poupon mustard before taking a meditative bite. "Do you know, 
Dr. Grenfell, that in the Pliocene, dear Mother Nature's name 
is Tana? ... Or Te, if you're of the Firvulag persuasion." 
"Don't talk with your mouth full, Greggy dear," said the 
Queen. 
Tears began to trickle down the madman's smooth cheeks. 
"If only we could clone her!" And Bryan was quite aware that 
the Genetics Master no longer referred to Mother Nature. "You 
wouldn't believe, Grenfell, how primitive this outfit really is 
compared to my old lab back at Johns Hopkins." 
"Watch the tournament, Greggy," Nontusvel urged. "See? 
There's Ogmol coming into the lists." 
The Lady Eadone Sciencemaster gave Bryan an appraising 
glance. "And what preliminary conclusions have you been able 
to draw in these first weeks of your culture-impact survey, 
Doctor? Genetic considerations aside, we're worried that the 
Tanu may be becoming too dependent upon human workers 
and human technology. As you've noted, none of our young 
people choose a career in agriculture any more. The same is 
becoming true in other practical disciplines: mining, architec-ture, 
civil engineering, manufacturing." 
"All activities that fall into my province," Aluteyn put in, 
looking harried. "Creation House is overflowing with musicians 
and dancers and sculptors and apprentice couturiers. But do 
you know how many signed up for bioluminescence technology 
this year? Five! Another couple of hundred years and we'll 
have to light our cities entirely with olive oil and reed pith 
soaked in tallow!" 
"You may have grounds for your concern," Bryan said care-fully..The indignant Craftsmaster said, 
"There's even talk of sep-arating 
the arts and sciences entirely—spinning off a new Guild, 

if you please!—with mostly gold humans in charge of tech-nology!" 
"Gomnol's idea, of course," Eadone remarked, entirely se-date. 
"I've been in harness since the old days," Aluteyn said. "I 
was one of the First Comers who defied the federation and 
made contact with Brede. There aren't many of us left now 
among the Tanu—the Thagdal, Dionket, Mayvar, Lady Ea-done, 
the Lord of Swords, poor old Leyr sulking in the Pyr-enees 
... There! Even I give the damn mountains their human 
name! Just sixty-odd years of the time-gate and a millennium 
of Duat culture nearly gone down the drain. Even the best 
fighters these days are mostly hybrids! The world's gone to 
hell in a nightsoil cart." 
"Compose yourself, Creative Brother," the Queen said. 
Greg-Donnet showed his teeth in a wide grin. "You can't. 
stand in the way of progress." 
"Oh, really?" said Nontusvel. 
A gray-torc usher opened the curtains at the rear of the royal 
box. He announced: "The Exalted Lord Nodonn Battlemaster 
and his consort, Lady Rosmar." 
A towering form in rosy-golden armor stood in the doorway, 
almost blinding Bryan with sunrise radiance. 
"My son!" cried the delighted Queen. 
"Mother!" 
"I'm so glad you're in time for his testing." 
The visage of Apollo displayed an ironic smile. "I wouldn't 
have missed it for the world. I've brought a little present for 
Mayvar's fancyboy." The Queen had risen from her seat to kiss her eldest child. 
Now she took the hand of a human woman dressed in a splendid 
costume and headdress of auroral hues and led her to the still-dazzled 
anthropologist. 
"And here's a surprise for you, Bryan. Just as we promised! 
Dear Nodonn will want to go down to the arena to witness the 
trial of Aiken Drum, so you two must sit together and get 
reacquainted. You do remember Bryan Grenfell, don't you, 
darling Rosmar?" 
"How could I ever forget?" Mercy said. Tenderly, she bent 
and kissed the anthropologist on the lips, then raised a playful.eye to her resplendent Lord. "You 
mustn't be jealous, my 
daemon lover. Bryan and I are old, old friends." 
"Enjoy one another," said the Battlemaster. 
He opened the wicket and descended the stairs to the arena. 
The stadium crowd and the stormy sky thundered together in 
a concert of adulation. 
Watching from the opposite side of the stadium, Aiken asked 
the Lord of Swords, "Who's the badass archangel?" 
"You'll be finding out shortly! I understand he's brought 
something special for your testing from the marshes of Laar." 
Tagan went out of the sideline dugout to meet the Tanu cham-pion. 
The jousting had come to a standstill in the uproar at-tending 
Nodonn's appearance. 
Stein, free now of his glass armor and gnawing the roasted 
leg of some large fowl, called from the passageway leading to 
the dressing rooms. "Hey, kid! Somebody here to see you. 
Your old pal, the B.C. stud." 
Raimo Hakkinen slid furtively into the dugout, pale eyes 
darting. None of the human or Tanu warriors was paying any 
attention to him, but he spoke in an anxious whisper just the 
same. "Only a minute of your time, Lord Aiken. That's all—" 
The trickster was aghast. "What's this fewkin' lord bullshit? 
It's me, Chopper—your li'l bitty buddy!" 
Aiken sent a quick probe behind bloodshot Mongol eyes 

... and found chaos. There was hardly a sensible thought to 
be found in that bog of weariness and dread that was Raimo's 
mind. Somehow, the silver torc had exacerbated the personal 
devils of the former woodsman. His experiences during the 
previous two weeks combined with this functional derangement 
to drive him to the brink of brain-wreck. 
"The women, Aik! The goddam man-eating Tanu bitches! 
They been squeezing me like a lemon!" 
Stein slapped one great thigh and gave a roar of cruel laugh-ter. 
Raimo only hung his head. He looked as if he had lost ten 
kilos. The formerly arrogant Finnish face had gone pinched and 
blotchy, the blond hair hung lank beneath a jaunty cap, and 
the once powerful body was shrunken within a costume that 
mimicked Italian Renaissance styling with its puffed sleeves, 
trunk hose, and codpiece. Raimo paid no attention to the Vi-king's 
derision but raised clasped hands and fell on his knees 
before the mischief-maker.."For the love of God, Aik—help me! You can! I heard how 
you got this fuckin' town eatin' outa your hand." 
Redaction was not Aiken's long metapsychic suit, but he 
plunged in to do the best he could for the tottering psyche. 
Some of the Tanu contestants for the games had begun to stare 
curiously, so Aiken pulled Raimo out into the corridor. Stein 
trailed after, chewing his bone. 
"They been passing me from one to the other," Raimo said. 
"All the ones who don't have kids—and there are a coopful! 
They try out all the silver guys—grays, too, if they like the 
looks of 'em. But if it turns out that you don't knock any of 
'em up, they quit being nice and get their buzz by—by—Jeez, 
Aik! D'you know what they can do to a guy wearin' this friggin' 
torc?" 
Aiken saw. He moved quickly through the limbic system 
of the humiliated, hagridden brain, turning off pain circuits 
and putting up a temporary mitigating structure that would 
help... a little. When things were at their worst, Raimo would 
be able to retreat into it and stay sane. As the woodsman's 
twitching features calmed, he pleaded, "Don't let 'em get me, 
Aik. We were buddies. Don't let the Tanu bitches ball me to 
death." 
A sudden burst of conversation and laughter sounded from 
the other end of the long passageway. Six tall apparitions of 
unearthly beauty, all rainbow chiffon and sparkling gems and 
floating blonde hair and on-the-gad pheromones, came gliding 
toward the three men with eager exclamations. 
"We farwatched you and knew you'd be hiding here!" 
"Wicked, delicious Raimo, to run away!" 
"Now we'll have to punish you again, won't we?" 
"Sisters! Do you know who the big one is? It's Stein! Let's 
take him, too!" 
There was a perfumed scurrying and a clash of coordinated 
coercive power against a mind-shield of gold, followed by 
mental giggles and impudent tweaks that set Aiken and the 
Viking on fire even though the psychic barriers were up. A 
single moan: "Don't let 'em." And then Raimo and the Tanu 
women were gone. 
"Holy shit," whispered Stein. 
Aiken shook his golliwog head. "Back in the good old 
Milieu, I'd of said, 'What a way to go.' But you wouldn't 
believe what was rattling around in that poor bastard's skull..A genuine fate worse than death! He 
just can't keep cutting it 
with those crazy broads!" 
Stein said, "Too bad you don't give lessons." 

"Aiken Drum!" came the mental and vocal command of the 
Lord of Swords. "You are required to demonstrate your power 
before the King and the nobility and populace of Muriah." 
"Oh-oh. I'm on." The trickster looked up at Stein, serious 
for once. "If they nail me out there, Mayvar will bring you to 
the place where Sukey's hidden." 
"Go stick it to 'em, kid," the Viking told him. 
"Be pleased, Awful Majesties, to accept the homage of the 
gold-torc human Aiken Drum, sponsored Candidate of the Ven-erable 
Mayvar Kingmaker, President of the Guild of Farsen-sors." 
Aiken rode up on the black charger to pay his devoirs. The 
plaudits were nearly as wild as those that had greeted the Bat-tlemaster. 
Nodonn himself stood at the foot of the stairs with Tagan 
and the Marshal of Sport, his head bared and an expression of 
benignity on his glowing face. When the cheers had completely 
died away, he said: 
"Aiken Drum—your Venerable Patron has acquainted us 
with your considerable metapsychic talents. But these are not 
the qualities we seek to assess tonight as we weigh your can-didacy. 
Instead, we would test the fundamental attributes that 
must characterize those of our battleworthy company—cour-age, 
resolution, intelligence. Demonstrate these as you meet 
the antagonist I have chosen for you... His name, according 
to the sages of Goriah, is Phobosuchus. Most of his kind have 
been extinct for nearly fifty million years. But a few survive 
as living fossils in the regions south of my city, in the vast 
estuaries of the River Laar where the long-necked sea monsters 
come to bask and breed. By my mind's power I have subdued 
and transported him here to try your skill. But I charge you, 
Aiken Drum, to remember our conventions of sport! You may 
use no overt mental force in your combat with Phobosuchus— 
only bodily strength, bravery, and natural cunning. Violate our 
precepts and the massed scorn of this noble company will 
annihilate you." 
A low-pitched sound swept over the crowd. Conflicting 
farspoken sentiments eddied around the little figure in the golden 
armor: some hostile, some mocking or fearful, but others....I'll be damned, Aiken thought. I think 
most of them want 
me to win! 
Nodonn's admonitions having ended, the King signaled that 
the contest should begin. With one hand Aiken raised his pen-noned 
lance, saluting first the royal box and then the mob of 
spectators. With the other hand, as he spurred his chaliko around 
to face the center of the arena, he repeated to the Battlemaster 
the finger gesture depicted on his banner. 
There was a great cheer. A heavily barred doorway beside 
the animal pens swung wide, revealing a dark cavelike opening. 
Nodonn cried out in simultaneous vocal and mental command: 
"Phobosuchus, come forth!" 
A dragon raced into the arena, then stopped in the middle 
of the field to gape its jaws and give a hiss like an erupting 
fumarole. 
The spectators responded with screams of awe and frenzied 
applause for the novelty, the like of which had never before 
been seen in the arena of Muriah. Phobosuchus was a monstrous 
crocodilian. Its skull measured two meters in length and the 
teeth in the bluish-gray mouth were the size of large bananas. 
At rest, and watching the approach of Aiken's black charger 
with a sardonic catlike eye, Phobosuchus squatted on the sand 
with bowed legs; the body was at least fifteen meters long, the 
dorsal surface armored with ridged bony scutes. The whimsy 

of the Battlemaster had augmented the natural pale-green-and-black 
banded pattern of the beast with painted designs of his 
own heraldic colors, rose-red and gold. 
Infuriated by the mob's screeching, the bright lights, and 
the painful mental goad that Nodonn's coercive faculty had 
just administered, Phobosuchus sought whom it might devour. 
It lashed its serrated tail, releasing a noxious blast of musk 
from its cloacal glands. Then it hoisted its huge body high off 
the ground and started running toward the most likely target at 
a brisk gallop. 
The pioneer "Scottish" planet of Dalriada where Aiken Drum 
had been nurtured had no native crocodilians, nor had the 
ecology engineers deemed that particular reptile order a suitable 
addition to the local biota. And so Aiken really hadn't the 
foggiest notion of the type of creature that was charging toward 
him. He decided that it had to be a dragon. A dragon that could 
run like a racehorse and was thoroughly pissed. Game etiquette 
decreed that he meet the oncoming monster with bold resolu-.tion. He took a firm grip on his lance 
and thumped spurred 
heels upon his mount's wide shoulders... 
... and quite forgot to hold onto its mind. 
The black chaliko gave a ringing scream of fear and threw 
him. It fled for its life to the opposite end of the arena while 
the young man in the golden glass armor scrambled to his feet, 
snatched up his lance, and took to his heels with Phobosuchus 
in pleased pursuit. 
After a silent beat of stunned horror, the spectators began 
a hilarious riot of cheering. The heavens added to the noise 
with a fanfaronade of thunder, which inspired the crocodile to 
bellow in response. It did this with its mouth closed, chasing 
Aiken up one side of the arena and down the other while clowns, 
referees, animal handlers, manure shovelers, Tanu knights in 
spiky jeweled armor, and dignified officials tumbled over one 
another and leaped or levitated into the front-row seats, trying 
to escape the racing monster. 
As he approached the stairway to the royal box, where 
Nodonn, Tagan, and the other high-ranking observers stood 
like a collection of huge carved-gemstone chessmen, Aiken 
suddenly changed course. He streaked in a flat curve for the 
center of the arena with Phobosuchus two or three meters be-hind 
and beginning to get a trifle winded. Aiken thrust the butt 
of his lance ahead of him, sank it deeply into the sand, and 
went hand over hand up it in a fluid pole vault that sent him 
arcing through the air like a golden missile. He landed a mon-ster's 
length to one side of Phobosuchus. The creature hesitated, 
then shied at the lance and its banner, which still quivered, 
embedded in the earth. 
Phobosuchus halted, belly to the ground. It swung its awe-some 
gape toward the golden manikin dancing around its flank. 
Aiken dashed toward the rear end of the great crocodile before 
it could shift its bulk and finally attained its blind spot. Skipping 
lightly as an autumn leaf, he ran along the knobbed and enam-eled 
expanse of the animal's back, keeping his balance like a 
logrolling champ while the reptile writhed and spun in an effort 
to discover what this peculiar prey was up to now. 
Abruptly, the crocodilian froze. The crowd drew a collective 
breath. Aiken flung himself prone onto the gaudy cobbled hide 
and clung to a pair of scutes with a death-grip. Phobosuchus 
exploded into a fit of bucking and twisting, furious to dislodge 
the human pest that adhered to its back. Its jaws clashed with 
a noise of rending timbers; it bounced and squirmed and flung.its three-ton body about with the 

agility of a basilisk, trying in 
vain to claw Aiken off with the black scimitars that tipped its 
feet. The reptile's tail churned up clouds of dust that momen-tarily 
hid both dragon and golden sticktight; but when the beast 
finally paused to rest, Aiken was still in position, lying on his 
armored stomach between two lines of scutes just aft of the 
front legs. 
Phobosuchus lowered itself to its belly again and hissed 
exasperation. As the mouth, approximately as long as Aiken's 
body, closed, the trickster suddenly sprang to his feet and 
dashed up the neck, between the eyes, and down the length of 
the prostrate skull to leap off the tip of the snout. The monster 
watched in a kind of stunned fascination as Aiken sprinted for 
his lance and wrenched it out of the ground. He came running 
back to retrace his madcap route up the reptile's head and onto 
its shoulders, purple banner streaming raggedly above his dusty 
golden helm. 
"A kill! A kill!" trumpeted the crowd. 
Phobosuchus bellowed in despair. The jaws opened and the 
huge skull tilted above Aiken like the span of a nightmare 
drawbridge. Lance at the ready, the little man looked into the 
dragon's upside-down eyes. Aiken's farsense showed him the 
structure of the skull beneath the thick, ornamented hide— 
the two parietal openings behind the eyesockets. 
Aiken chose the right fenestra, plunged his lance in, and 
immediately leapt from the creature's back and retreated to a 
safe distance. Once again Phobosuchus erupted into a paroxysm 
of thrashing, and this lasted for some time because dragons do 
not die easily. But at last the great body lay jerking in the dust 
and Aiken plucked the shattered lance with its ruined pennon 
from the bleeding brain. He walked very slowly to the royal 
stairway. 
There was King Thagdal waiting for him. And the Queen, 
smiling, and off at one side the Battlemaster, aloof and glorious. 
And there was also a tall stooped figure in a plum-colored robe 
who cleaned his dusty armor with a gesture of her hand and 
gave him a fresh ensign, violet plumes, and a cloak like the 
spangled purple-black of the twilight sky to wear as he stood 
before the King. 
Three times the Marshal had to cry: "Pray silence for the 
accolade of His Awful Majesty!" At last, the spectators were still. 
The Lord of Swords stepped to the side of the sovereign.and held out a scabbard, from which 
Thagdal drew an ame-thystine 
sword. Holding the blade in one hand and the golden 
hilt in the other, the King poised the weapon in front of the 
face of the shining youth. 
"We tender to you this our accolade, and bid you be forever our faithful knight. What name do you 
choose for your initiation 
into the noble battle-company of the Tanu?" 
Mayvar's mental voice pervaded the arena with its muted 
tone. 
He may not choose his name. I will choose his name at the 
acceptable time. But that time is not now. 
The royal mouth tightened and static stirred the blond ten-drils 
of the King's beard. "I defer to my Venerable Sister, your 
Patron and Lady. You will retain your human name until that 
time which she... foresees comes to pass. Receive this sword 
then, Lord Aiken Drum, and bear it in my service on the 
Delbaeth Quest." 
Grinning, the golliwog accepted the vitredur blade. The 
Lord of Swords fastened the scabbard and its baldric and the 

crowd cried, "Slonshal!" Up in the royal box, Lord Greg-Donnet hung over the rail 
cheering and scattering crumbs of egg yolk. "Good boy! Good 
lad! Well done!" He turned to the Craftsmaster, who watched the ceremony below with stony 
restraint. "Now we know that 
the lad is brave as well as talented in the metafunctions. Perhaps 
Mayvar wasn't quite so out of line as we feared, eh, Aluteyn?" 
"Stop talking like an ass, Greggy. There's the Shape of 
Fire. The kid hasn't a chance of taking him." 
Greg-Donnet chortled. "You think not? The bookies are 
giving three hundred to one on him. Or they were, before he 
polished off the dragon. Can I interest you in a side bet at those 
odds?" 
Down in the arena, Mayvar was embracing her protege. The 
King and the Battlemaster mounted the stairs to the box, looking 
unaccountably grim. 
"A bet?" Aluteyn Craftsmaster was startled, then thoughtful. 
"Oh, no, Greggy. I don't think so. In no way." 
"I was afraid of that," sighed the madman. He reached for 
another egg..11 
THE TRIMARAN FLEW WESTWARD BENEATH THE OUTTHRUSTING 
arm of Aven, skimming the shallow salt lagoon by virtue of 
the metapsychic gale Mercy had whistled up when Bryan pro-tested 
that the day was too calm for sailing. 
For what seemed like hours they took turns at the helm. 
She sang the oddly familiar Tanu Song, and the red-and-white 
sail bellied before them, hiding the distant mainland and the 
snow-crowned eastern end of the Betic Cordillera. 
So strange, he thought, exulting in the nearness of her and 
the speed and the sunshine. So strange to realize that this was 
Earth. The Dragon Range of Aven, which would one day be-come 
the heights of Mallorca, had its lower slopes dark with 
tame forests and meadows where hipparions and antelopes and 
mastodons ranged in royal preserves. Those tawny hills, half-shrouded 
now in haze to starboard, would in six million years 
be islands named Ibiza and Formentera. (But never again would 
he race a yacht through azure waves off Punta Roy a, for the 
Pliocene waters were pale as milk, and so her wild sea-reflect-ing 
eyes.) So strange. 
The peninsular mass of Balearis rose from thick deposition 
beds of salt and gypsum and Other sediments that had been laid 
down during the numerous regressions and inundations of the 
Mediterranean Basin. Streams flowing southward from Aven 
carved the minerals into canyons and buttes, spires and hoo-doos, 
striped with pastel colors and sparkling in faerie splen-dor. 
.. and all of it would be gone without a trace by the time 
of the Galactic Milieu, drowned under unimaginable tons of 
water that would press the very bed of the sea two kilometers 
deeper and more, making abysses where now the Pliocene 
shallows glinted in the trimaran's wake. So strange..After a long time the flats closed in around 
them and then 
folded into blinding gypsum dunes shimmering with mirages, 
among which weathered turrets of igneous rock poked up. 
There were hills and cliffs. The boat sailed up an eerie long 
fjord where whiteness gave way to purple and gray-blue, eroded 
slopes of ancient ash and volcanic scoria, broken cindercones 
lightly clothed in coniferous forest. The fjord was deep, the 
water now flowing from some western source. But Mercy's 
tame wind let them press on, breasting the current, until they 
emerged at last into an open expanse of saltmarsh, a green and 
living everglade that seemed to stretch on forever into the 
misted west. 

"This is the Great Brackish Marsh," she told him. "A Span-ish 
river pours in fresh water off the Betics, the high peaks 
we'll call the Sierra Nevada." 
The diminished salinity of the marsh produced an environ-ment 
much less inimical to life than the shores of the Medi-terranean 
lagoons. Here grasses and sedges and mangroves 
throve in the shallows and there were many scattered islets with 
shrubs and hardwoods and swags of flowering vines. Gulls and 
gaudy pigeons wheeled overhead. Pink-and-black flamingos 
left off straining crustaceans from the pools and fled with honk-ing 
cries when the invading trimaran glided by. 
"We'll stop here," Mercy said. Her psychokinetic wind died 
away to the lightest of breezes. They hauled in the spinnaker 
and steered to a beautiful anchorage where a tall limestone 
outcropping crowned with laurel and tamarisk gave them shade 
from the sun. 
"The Southern Lagoon proper ended when we came into 
the Long Fjord," she said. "This marsh stretches westward for 
another hundred and fifty kilometers or so, and beyond it are 
dry lakes and sand and alkali deserts all the way to the Gibraltar 
Isthmus. It's all far below sea level except for Alboran Volcano 
and a few smaller cones. Nothing lives in there but lizards and 
insects." 
She coiled lines neatly. Leaving him to cope with the other 
sails, she went into the little cabin to get the basket with the 
lunch he had packed: a bottle of genuine Krug '03 from Mu-riah's 
black market, a wedge of the local cheddar equivalent, 
goose-liver sausage, sweet butter, a long loaf, and oranges. It 
had been too late in the season for black cherries. 
"If only you'd waited for me back in the future," Bryan.said, "we'd have eaten this off Ajaccio. I 
had it all planned. 
The cruise, the supper under the Corsican moon..." 
"The obligatory lovemaking. Dear Bryan!" Her wild eyes 
had become opalescent. 
"I wanted to marry you, Mercy. I loved you from the first 
time I saw you. I still love you. That's why I had to follow, 
even though it meant coming this far." 
One of her hands reached toward him, touching his cheek. 
The breeze moved the heavy fall of auburn hair that was tied 
back with a narrow bandeau. She was not wearing exotic cloth-ing 
but rather a simple sunsuit of green and white, cut in the 
style of their own era. Only the torc, gleaming in the V-neck 
of the halter, recalled to him the gulf that now separated Mercy 
from Rosmar. 
What did that matter? What matter any of the changes— 
the intrigues of the exotics, the cynical entrusting of her to him 
by the Tanu lover as he departed on his preposterous Quest. 
Mercy was here with him and real. All the rest was a fantasy 
to be forgotten... or at least postponed. 
But change the earth or change the sky, yet will I love her— 
"Have they made you happy?" he asked. 
She cut bread with a glass knife and sliced the cheese. "Can't 
you tell, Bryan?" 
"You're different. More alive. You never sang in our world." 
"How did you know?" 
He only smiled. "I'm glad you can sing here, Mercy." 
"I never fit into the world we were born into. Don't laugh! 
There are more of us changelings than you might think! Mis-begotten 
ones. Atavisms. No amount of counseling or brain 
chemical fiddling or deep-redact ever helped me to feel con-tented 
or satisfied. No man—forgive me if this hurts you!— 

no man ever gave me more than momentary comfort. I never 
knew a human being I could truly love." 
He was pouring champagne. The words she spoke had no 
meaning and so they brought no pain. She was here with him. 
Nothing else mattered. 
"It was the latencies, Bryan. I know that now. The people 
here have helped me to understand. All those strong meta-psychic 
tensions locked away unused and unrealized. But pull-ing 
me—do you see? The operant metapsychics of the Milieu 
have their Unity, but there was none of that for me back on 
the Elder Earth. I belonged nowhere. Rested nowhere. Found 
peace nowhere... I found a little solace in drugs, a little more.in music, in my work with the 
medieval pageants in Ireland 
and in France. But it was really no good. I felt I was an outsider, 
a misfit. Just a bit of nonviable scum on our famous human 
gene pool." 
"Mercy—" I would love you any way. Every way. 
"None of that, now!" She laughed lightly and took the glass 
of bubbling wine from him. "You know quite well that I was 
a hopeless mess, banging about like a moth around a streetlight. 
I played my games at the chateau and found other lost ones to 
share my bed, and suffocated quite a bit of the pain in a fog 
of sinsemilla. An old-fashioned vice. You smoke it as a eu-phoric. 
I brought some cuttings with me to grow—never 
dreaming that here I'd have no need of it ever again. This 
place, these people, all of this is what I yearned for without 
knowing." 
"All I wanted," he said, "was you. If you can't love me, 
all I want is your happiness." She put her fingers against his 
lips, then lifted her own champagne glass for him to drink 
from. 
"My dear. You are a rare man, darling Bryan. In your own 
way, perhaps as uncanny as I." 
"I won't intrude on you if you're happy with him—" 
"Hush! You don't understand how it is here. It's all new. 
A new world with new ways. A new life for you as well as 
for me. Who can say what might happen?" 
He raised his eyes from the wineglass and met her wild 
glance, still not knowing what she was saying. 
"Do you know what they've freed in me?" she cried. "What 
this golden torc has done? I've become a creator!... Not the 
kind who spins illusions or invents things or fashions works of 
art. A better kind! The highest of the Tanu creative ones are 
able to gather energy and channelize it. I can do that. Throw 
lightning, project beams of light, make things go hot or cold. 
But I can do other things as well—things no Tanu is capable 
of! I can take air and moisture and drifting dust and any old 
kind of rubbishy matter you can imagine and knead it and stir 
it and transform it into something all new! Look—just look!" 
She sprang up, setting the boat to rocking, and reached 
toward the sky, a goddess summoning wind and mud and 
marshwater and cellulose and sugars and acids and esters from 
the grass. A flash of flame, an explosive report— 
She held cherries. 
Laughing, almost giddy, she let the black-red fruit dangle.from her fingers. "I saw them in you 
mind! Your favorite fruit 
that you wanted to lavish on your true love! Well—here they 
are, to complete the picnic that we've had to postpone for so 
long. We'll have them together with the golden apples of the 
Hesperides!" 
It was not real, he told himself. Only she was real in all 

this world. And so he was calm and smiling as she dropped 
the cherries onto a large napkin they had spread on the chart 
table. The fruit was cold; drops of condensation beaded the 
juicy heart shapes. 
"I'm still learning to use the power, of course. And there's 
no guarantee I'll pass it along full-blown to the children, be-cause 
these high faculties are unpredictable. But who knows? 
Perhaps some day I'll be able to manipulate the genes them-selves! 
Nodonn thinks it's possible, although Gomnol and 
Greggy don't. But even without that, I'll do marvelous things. 
Miraculous things!" 
"You always were a miracle," he said. (Alas the child whose 
child?) 
"Ah, silly!" she exclaimed, pretending anger. "The Thag-dal's, 
of course, as the first must always be. You know about 
our jus primae noctis. And does it matter to you?" 
"All that matters is that I love you. I'll always love you, 
no matter what you are." 
"And what do you think I am?" She looked into his mind 
and the anger that blazed out now was real. "I'm not Nodonn's 
concubine! I'm his wife. He's taken me and no other." 
And sixteen Tanu women and four hundred human latents 
of high talent before you ... "I don't care, Mercy. Stop reading 
me! I can't help the way the thoughts come. They have nothing 
to do with my love for you." 
She turned away from him and looked out over the marsh. 
"He'll be king one day when the Thagdal's finished. When he 
feels he has the full support of the battle-company, he'll chal-lenge 
the old man in spite of Mayvar and win in the Heroic 
Encounter. And I'll be his queen. None of his other women 
had metafunctions to match mine. The exotics were barren 
except for five who had daughters and died. The humans 
... were beautiful and fertile but none of their talents are 
as fine as mine. They've all been discarded. I won't be. After 
I've borne this child for the Thagdal I'll have Nodonn's. Even 
if I can't manipulate the genes, I can learn to split the zygote 
with my psychokinesis and have twins, triplets even, just as.easily as a single child. With the 
help of the Skin I'll have 
them safely and painlessly again and again and again. I could 
have hundreds! And live for thousands of years. What do you 
say to that?" 
"If you want it, I wish it for you." 
Her indignation melted as she saw how forlorn and hopeless 
he had become before the prospect of her apotheosis. He stood 
there, moving slightly to keep his balance as the boat rocked, 
and she came to him and put bare arms around his neck and 
let her softness rest against him. 
"Bryan, Bryan, don't be sad. Didn't I tell you it was a new 
world? I can't promise to be yours alone, my dear, but you 
needn't fear I'll drive you away. Not if you'll be gentle and 
discreet. Not if you'll... help me." "Mercy!" 
She closed his lips with her own. The warmth and brightness 
of her flooded suddenly over him, carrying far away the doubts 
and fearful promptings of logic. He kissed and shut her wild 
eyes and his own vision of the real world faded before her 
opening blaze. As their minds merged, so did their bodies, 
easily and perfectly as though angels were coupling instead of 
man and woman. He lifted and exalted her and she in accepting 
drew him even higher until each had consumed the other in a 
sunburst of joy. 
"That's the way it is with us," she told him. "When mind 

and body are in sweet harmony it happens like this between 
lovers. And you're spoiled for the other kind forever." 
"Yes," he agreed. "Yes." 
"And you will help me?" 
"Always. In any way." 
"Remember your promise when you wake up, my dear. If 
you really love me. If you really want me to be happy. I have 
enemies, my dear. There are people who can hurt me, who 
can see to it that I never reach the thing I've been promised. 
You must help me. I'll show you how. I need you." 
He heard himself say, "Only let me stay." 
"Of course." Now the sun-flood gentled, became soft and 
dark as he was carried into the depths. "You'll stay with me 
and love me. As long as you can.".12 
THE BODY IN ITS TRANSLUCENT SHROUD LAY IN STATE UPON 
a plinth of black glass in the great hall of Redact House. 
These were the Great Ones of the High Table who came to 
pay homage: Queen Nontusvel, Eadone Sciencemaster, Dion-ket 
the Healer, Mayvar Kingmaker, Aluteyn Craftsmaster, Sebi-Gomnol 
the Lord Coercer, and Kuhal Earthshaker, a son of 
the Queen who was deputy to Nodonn and second among the 
psychokinetics. And others of the High Table included Imidol 
the Deputy Coercer; Riganone, second among farsensors; Cul-luket 
the King's Interrogator; and Anear the Loving—all chil-dren 
of Nontusvel; and Katlinel the Darkeyed, half-human 
daughter of the deposed Lord Coercer Leyr. And those Great 
Ones absent on the Delbaeth Quest were Thagdal the High 
King, Nodonn Battlemaster, Tagan Lord of Swords, Bunone 
War-teacher, Fian Skybreaker, Alberonn Mindeater, and Bleyn 
the Champion. 
The rulers of the Many-Colored Land looked upon the dead 
Anastasya Astaurova, linked minds, and sang the Song. 
The caul clung tightly to her wide-open eyes, the arched 
nostrils, the clenched teeth visible through parted lips, the 
graceful neck with its golden torc. White as the salt and as 
cold were her splendid breasts and torso all beaded with tiny 
round bells, the belled legs and belled arms and ingenious 
surgeon's hands. 
Mental speech, flickering and nuance-filled, passed among 
the assembled mourners with electric swiftness. 
NONTUSVEL: Tasha-Bybar, farewell. So lovely to die, alas, thou 
strangest of Earth's gifts to us, never understood and never.sated, in torment even after thy 
refashioning, dancing to 
find release in grotesque death. 
DIONKET; A variation of her sabre dance with an unforeseen 
climax. Or was it? 
GOMNOL: She was a genius! She should have been saved! 
DIONKET: Teams of my redactors strove for three weeks to 
restore her within the Skin, but her mind was never able to 
cooperate. There were too many adverse factors: the massive 
trauma of the impalement, her longstanding unsanity— 
burned out as she was from our loving—the subconscious 
desire for obliteration. Even at best she was an insecure 
vessel of life-force, maladapted, unhelped by her transsexual 
conversion. 
ALUTEYN: None other had her skill with the operation. 
GOMNOL: No Tanu surgeon could equal her. No other human 
surgeon could/would do the great work she did. 
EADONE: She was the opener of human wombs, the guarantor 
of our Tanu survival. Before her coming, our race dwelt 
precariously beneath this ferocious sun, multiplying slowly, 

so slowly. But she showed us a way to conquer our bio-logical 
limitations, to burst forth in an explosion of life that 
has given us mastery of the planet. Praise to the departed 
Tasha-Bybar for having saved us! 
ALUTEYN + GOMNOL: Praise. 
MAYVAR: Given time, we could have saved ourselves. 
EADONE: With the rama surrogates? Hardly! 
ALUTEYN: Even now, Venerable Sister, the Firvulag outnumber 
us four to one. 
MAYVAR: Nevertheless, what I say is true. 
NONTUSVEL: Listen to Mayvar. She tells the truth, although her 
vision of it may differ from that of my Host. Oh, yes... we 
can and will survive of ourselves. As to how, I point in 
humility to the fruit of my own womb, the children of the 
Thagdal and Nontusvel: strong men and women, of the pure 
Tanu strain without human admixture, sitting at our High 
Table, leaders within our Guilds. They are the true salvation 
of our race! These children—my Host—and their own off-spring 
are living proof of Tanu viability here on Earth, our 
guarantee of racial continuity. I will not deprecate the good 
work of Bybar nor the contributions of our other human 
benefactors. But let it be noted that the Tanu are survival-fit 
even without the mingling of human genes! The Host of.Nontusvel, two hundred and forty-two strong, 
has proved 
fully adapted to life on this planet. 
KUHAL + IMIDOL + RIOANONE + CULLUKET + ANEAR: Let 
the Queen-Dam's words be noted. It is in our Host that true 
survival resides! EADONE: Your offspring's reproductive rate is still far below 
the optimum, Queen and Sister. But we may concede that 
your strain is the strongest among fullbreeds. 
GOMNOL: You still can't deny that human genes saved the Tanu 
genetic bacon! In the sixty or so years of interspecific mating 
the Tanu population growth rate has increased tenfold. And 
the hybrids include most of your best fighters, your top 
creative people, and a majority of the coercers, 
CULLUKET: Nevertheless, we now question the wisdom of con-tinued 
dilution of our heritage. 
IMIDOL: And above all, Coercive Brother, we question your 
scheme concerning the human operant, Elizabeth. 
GOMNOL: So that's it. 
ANEAR: Dear Adopted Brother: we of the Host harbor only 
goodwill toward those of mixed Tanu and human blood. 
And we embrace the loyal human golds, such as yourself, 
who have so enriched our lives upon this planet. But we 
must take care lest we squander our inheritance by engen-dering 
more and more hybrids. 
RIGANONE: Tana's will would be better served by an increase 
of purebloods. The vigor of the Host has proved that the 
original Tanu strain may reproduce itself adequately, albeit 
at a slower rate. 
KUHAL: Disaster awaits us if we continue to mate with humans! 
Our noble Brother Battlemaster warned us of this decades 
ago. But we were so bedazzled by the benefits offered by 
humanity that we would not listen to his admonitions. 
CULLUKET: The prospect of children by the Thagdal and Eliz-abeth 
has forced us to listen. 
GOMNOL: The King endorses my plan fully. Eagerly! 
EADONE: As Aluteyn and I have done. And y e t ... I must admit 
to some misgivings concerning the role of humanity in our 
High Kingdom. The Thagdal, too, has pondered this matter. 
For this reason we have commissioned the human anthro-pologist 

Bryan Grenfell to conduct a culture-impact study 
so that we may better understand the patterns of the psy-chosocial 
currents, both beneficial and inimical. 
KUHAL: We of the Host have no need for human anthropology!.Our racial instincts alone are 
sufficient to show impending calamity! IMIDOL: We and our Mother have seen what must be done if 
the Tanu heritage is to survive. Once Elizabeth's genes 
merge with ours, the true Tanu will be doomed. We say: 
Put an end to all bastardization! Return to the ancient way 
before it is too late! 
ALUTEYN: Throw out the babies with the bath water? Piffle! 
You and Nodonn are only afraid your precious dynasty 
might get nudged out of power. 
EADONE: Nevertheless, Craftsmaster, our Coercive Brother Im- idol has raised a serious point. 
NONTUSVEL: Dearest Sister—we are convinced of its serious- ness! 
GOMNOL: O Adopted Kinfolk, look at this matter rationally. This yearning for the good old days is 
futile. I've studied 
the records of the Lord Historian Seniet. Have you forgotten 
how it really was before the coming of humanity? Would 
you go back to living in crude strongholds in the wilderness? 
Would you revert to the hunter-gatherer culture of the Fir-vulag? 
You lived like savages before we shared our tech-nology 
and our genes with you! 
NONTUSVEL: Not really, Gomnol dear. It was a simpler life, 
that's true. Not nearly so grand. But we had the ramas to 
serve us. And our young people were interested in crafts 
then— 
ALUTEYN: Not like the damn dilettantes nowadays. Wasn't for 
the humans and the hybrids, the whole economy'd go to pot. 
NONTUSVEL: Now, Aluteyn. You exaggerate. I am a First Comer 
like you, even though I have only been Queen for eight 
hundred years. We had a good life in those early days. We 
hunted for food as well as for sport. There was some trading 
with the Firvulag for gems and furs and useful herbs and 
trinkets. And we bartered our splendid textiles and glass 
armor to them. Do you remember how valiantly our warriors 
fought when the Grand Combat was celebrated fiercely afoot, 
hand to hand, with no human levies standing between our 
fighters and the Old Foe? Do you remember those battles 
on the Firvulag's Field of Gold, and how we would rejoice 
when we captured their Sword of Sharn and bore the trophy 
home in triumph? And perhaps they would wrest it back from 
us in the year following, but we would train and scheme.and strengthen our brains and muscles for 
the next Com-bat— 
and win! Those were the days, dear Craftsmaster! But 
now... for forty years running we have bested the Firvulag 
in the Combat with the aid of human and hybrid warriors. 
How stale the victory becomes. What if the Foe become so 
discouraged that they refuse to fight? 
MAYVAR: It would show that they, at least, had evolved. 
DIONKET: Morally, if not mentally. 
CULLUKET: Lord Healer, you cannot expect me to sit unpro-testing 
as you and the Venerable Kingmaker flirt with heresy 
against our glorious ideal of battle! 
ALUTEYN: Dip your heresy in chaliko flop, boy! I say, what 
we need are fewer head-wallopers and more technicians! 
These simple joys of barbarism are all very well. But I'm 
the one who'll have to keep the glass-ovens stoked and the 
food and drink coming to the table. I remember how it was, 
chivvying Tanu crafters who were more interested in battling 
and screwing and Hunting than in getting a day's work done. 
Oh, the old-time ways had their charm! I'll concede that I 

wallowed in gore and flung thunderbolts with the best of 
'em. But you can't give up progress any more than you can 
pretend the time-gate never opened. It did! The humans 
came. We used them. And now the good old days are gone. 
NONTUSVEL: We could restore the best parts of them. 
KUHAL: We are not against material progress, Craftsmaster. 
Only against the erosion of our Tanu ideals and their re-placement 
with alien human values. The pacifistic senti-ments 
of Lord Dionket and Lady Mayvar and their factions 
are well known—call them heresy or moral evolution. But 
the majority of us don't share their philosophy. It is a phi-losophy 
of weaklings, of hybrids, and of humans! 
GOMNOL: Our Psychokinetic Brother distorts reality. All torced 
humans, excepting a few abnormals who have not reacted 
favorably to the mental amplification, are loyal to the Tanu 
race. As to the erosion of your ideals... when have you 
been stronger? You rule the world! And my plan can only 
make that rule more glorious. I will admit that times have 
changed—but this is not the planet of your origin. You have 
adapted, and you'll continue to adapt, to Earth. This is fully 
in accord with Tana's will. 
KUHAL: We are grateful to the Lord Coercer for explaining our 
religion to us. 
GOMNOL: Your suspicions of my plan are groundless. It poses.no threat whatsoever to your dynasty. 
Would the Thagdal 
approve it if it did? Do you question the vision of your own 
King? 
EADONE: The plan involving Elizabeth is exciting. I am fas-cinated 
by the prospect of speeding our race's mental de-velopment— 
from latency to operancy—by incorporating 
her heritage within our own. To be free of the artificial 
action of the torcs! To see our offspring grow up to be true 
metapsychics! To see them possessed of godlike powers, 
perhaps even greater than those of the Milieu metapracti-tioners! 
There would be no more black-torc tragedies, no 
more burnt-out young Tanu brains unable to withstand the 
torc's amplification. With Elizabeth's genes, we could take 
an evolutionary shortcut, a leap across the aeons. Instead 
of waiting thousands or even millions of years to achieve 
operancy, we could see it within our own lifetimes ... 
ALUTEYN: I admit: a magnificent dream. 
GOMNOL: No dream! A reality—if you don't turn your backs 
on my plan because of superstitious fear or racial chauvinism 
or petty politics. The anthropologist will prove to you that 
the coming of humanity to the Many-Colored Land has done 
you far more good than harm. I'll stake my life on it. 
IMIDOL: You may, at that. 
NONTUSVEL: Now ... we must keep our tempers. 
GOMNOL: You Host talk of racial purity. A thoroughly unscien-tific 
notion! Any biologist of the Milieu would tell you that. 
Just take an objective look at your allegedly pure Tanu 
heritage—! Firvulag recessives popping up like mad in every 
third birth. 
KUHAL: Take care, Lord Coercer! Our Mother's strain is un-tainted. 
Never once has she given birth to one of the Foe. 
GOMNOL: If that's true, you're very likely throwing out the very 
alleles you want to fix! And you want to use the Host as 
prime brood stock! Damn it, the Firvulag strain is the op-erant 
one! Ask the Lady Sciencemaster. Greggy and I have 
given up trying to sell you on mating with the Foe. But 
Elizabeth represents a unique genetic opportunity! A human 

operant has genes that not only enhance general survival, 
as the latents have done, but also give you the grand evo-lutionary 
leap that Lady Eadone spoke of. My plan leads 
to the fulfillment of Tanu destiny! 
KUHAL: Again you presume to interpret Tana's will. 
NONTUSVEL: It would be more fitting for the Goddess to work.through our own Tanu line. We're 
afraid that Elizabeth's 
genes will turn us into humans, you see. Or at least into a 
race that is quite non-Tanu. 
KUHAL + IMIDOL + RIGANONE + CULLUKET + ANEAR: We 
do not need humanity! Better that we fulfill our destiny 
without humans! 
GOMNOL: Then why has Nodonn himself taken to wife a woman 
of my race? 
(Confusion.) 
GOMNOL: Perhaps you'd better read your Crown Prince a re- fresher course in Tana's holy will. 
NONTUSVEL: Do not descend to blasphemy, Lord Coercer. We 
have made it clear that we acknowledge the benefits that 
human genes have vouchsafed: the more powerful bodies, 
the increased fertility, the enhancement of coercive and cre-ative 
metafunctions. And in the case of the precious Rosmar, 
we have embraced a rare and wondrous refinement of the 
creative power never seen among our Tanu adepts. She is 
the unique one! The value of her genes is self-evident. We 
welcome her as a fit consort for our future King. Dear 
Nodonn has had many wives—and as he is scarcely eight 
hundred years old, he may have many more if it pleases 
him. But let us not wander from the original matter at hand. 
Your plan, Adopted Son, proposes to go far beyond the 
mating customs that already obtain between the two races. 
The woman Elizabeth is not a talented latent such as yourself 
or Rosmar. She is a masterclass operant whose genes must 
be formidable indeed. Lord Greg-Donnet postulates that it 
is likely that all of her offspring would be operant—al-though 
perhaps not so powerful as their mother. He has also 
urged that, for the speediest achievement of race operancy, 
we should implant her ova in surrogates. But not ramapi-thecines! 
Human and Tanu women are to bear these wonder 
children! Who can assure us that this large new generation 
of torcless hybrids would be loyal to Tanu ideals? They will 
be a new race. It is logical that they would owe first loyalty 
to their own kind. EADONE: There is a danger. 
ALUTEYN: That possibility hadn't occurred to me. And I know Greggy never talked up artificial 
implanting to the King. 
That's not the Thagdal's idea of fun. 
GOMNOL: This is ridiculous! Elizabeth's children would be as 
much Tanu as any hybrids. Education would see to it..KUHAL + IMIDOL + RIGANONE + CULLUKET + ANEAR: 
The 
Host does not concur. There is only one way to secure the 
safety of the Tanu heritage. The operant woman must die. 
GOMNOL: You must not destroy her genes! Do you want to wait 
millions of years to achieve operancy? Future generations 
might call you worse than shortsighted! And if you come 
to your senses later on, it will be too late. There may never 
be another like Elizabeth to come through the gate! 
NONTUSVEL: Alas. If only she hadn't come. 
GOMNOL: She's here. I say it's Tana's will that she not be 
wasted... And don't you start twitting me about religion 
again, Kuhal! Not until the Goddess gives you her blueprint 
stamped APPROVED! My plan is as likely to coincide with 
divine will as your own. 

ALUTEYN: Damn all this talk of becoming operant in millions 
of years! We know what's going to happen here on Earth 
in millions of years. The ramas will have evolved into hu-mans. 
And we'll be extinct! There's Tana's will for you! 
Maybe the Thagdal is right about Gomnol's plan. At least 
it would give our people a good long run at playing meta-psychic 
before the last snuff. Jack up our brainpower to 
operant status and we'll likely figure a way to get off this 
flatulent orifice of a planet! 
NONTUSVEL: Aluteyn, dear. Control yourself. 
ALUTEYN: If only we could be sure. These damn precious genes of Elizabeth's. If only they weren't 
so... human. 
GOMNOL: How many times must I prove my motives to you? 
I have only the Tanu best interests at heart. I have had, 
from the beginning! 
NONTUSVEL: There's still the vexing question of possible ov-erdependence 
upon humanity by our race. I confess that I 
await the results of Bryan's survey with some trepidation. 
KATLINEL: And what happens if the survey does show that the 
culture impact was largely unfavorable? Will you of the 
Host demand the death of all humans? Will you kill hybrids 
like me as well? Is this the secret solution that you've had 
in mind all along? 
NONTUSVEL: Oh, Katy. How can you think it? 
KATLINEL: The rest of them do, Queen-Mother. 
IMIDOL: Nonsense. CULLUKET: You are overwrought, Creative Sister. Let me ad-minister 
a calmative. 
KATLINEL: No, thank you, Redactive Brother. No, thank you!.EADONE: When the Thagdal returns at the 
time of Truce, we must have this out. Surely there can be a compromise. 
KUHAL + IMIDOL + RIGANONE + CULLUKET + ANEAR: 
Never on Elizabeth! 
ALUTEYN: There's another factor nobody's even mentioned. As 
long as we're discussing genetic menaces, what about the 
other one? How would he fit into Gomnol's scheme? Or 
has Aiken Drum slipped the Lord Coercer's mind? 
GOMNOL: I've assured King Thagdal and I assure you, too, that 
the boy is nothing but a mental nova. His mind will burn 
out as quickly as it flared up. He'll be a puling idiot inside 
of another month. 
IMIDOL: You've tested him with your psychometric gadgets and 
proved this, Coercive Brother? 
GOMNOL: You know very well that the Lady Mayvar wouldn't 
consent to my meddling with her great and good protege, 
Coercive Brother. 
IMIDOL: So much for guarantees. Tell us, Venerable Sister: On 
your honor as Kingmaker—is the youth Aiken Drum a 
mental nova? 
MAYVAR: No. But he is no menace to our race, either. 
GOMNOL: Even if he doesn't burn out, he's only a harmless 
nuisance—a practical joker with a certain crowd-pleasing 
charm. You people just haven't seen this type of human 
being before. 
ANEAR: I should hope not. RIGANONE: Nodonn doesn't take Aiken Drum lightly. Why else would he have 
insisted on sharing the Delbaeth Quest with 
him? 
EADONE: That is not the important question. What we really must know is why this charming, 
harmless prankster has 
been taken to kin by Mayvar Kingmaker. Let us be blunt. 
Will Aiken Drum challenge in the Grand Combat? 
MAYVAR: If Tana wills that my golden laddie survive the Del-baeth 
Quest, then he will. 

EADONE: Is Aiken Drum fertile? 
MAYVAR: He is. 
EADONE: Would he challenge Nodonn? MAYVAR: You must ask him that. 
NONTUSVEL: A human! A human challenging my Nodonn? 
KUHAL + IMIDOL + RIGANONE + CULLUKET + ANEAR: Tana 
forfend!.EADONE: Are Aiken Drum's metapsychic powers of sufficient 
potential to defeat the Battlemaster? 
MA WAR: Only Tana knows. 
ALUTEYN: You know what would happen if the boy did win, 
don't you, kinfolk? He'd challenge the Thagdal! Is that the game you're playing, Venerable Sister? 
MAYVAR: Beware, Aluteyn Craftsmaster. I play no games! I 
only do my Making as the Goddess commands me, and 
neither you nor the Host nor the entire battle-company of 
the Many-Colored Land may tell me how to fulfill my an-cient 
office... Or would you? 
(Dread.) 
ALUTEYN: Well, you blew it once before with Lugonn, so it's 
no certainty. 
MAYVAR: It is no certainty, as you say, Craftsmaster. But the 
Combat alone may prove the Goddess's will in this matter. 
Let no one here presume to interfere with my Making. 
CULLUKET: No one will interfere—if your motives are true to 
the Tanu ideal. 
MAYVAR: So once again, Young Redactor, you accuse me of heresy. 
CULLUKET: Do you deny you have long opposed the battle-philosophy? 
Do you deny your sympathy for the traitorous 
heretic Minanonn, who betrayed his office as Battlemaster 
by preaching that Tanu and Firvulag should be brothers in 
sun as well as shadow? 
MAYVAR: Poor Minanonn was ahead of his time, and impru-dent. 
And he has paid for his rashness these five hundred 
years. 
CULLUKET: But you and Dionket are cool hands! You're willing 
to play a waiting game until your human puppet is on the 
throne. 
DIONKET: The Venerable Kingmaker and I are loyal to the Tanu 
race and resolved to see its destiny fulfilled in glory. And 
I admonish you to keep a respectful turn of mind, Redactive 
Brother, when addressing your elders. 
NONTUSVEL: Oh, dear. This is all so confusing! Culluket, my 
son, you can't accuse people of heresy simply because they 
prefer the quiet life to Hunting and fighting. There have 
always been gentle ones among us. 
IMIDOL: And they grow more numerous. Especially among the 
hybrids. 
KATLINEL: We hybrids are loyal to the Tanu race! It is our race!.But if it's heresy to persuade 
the Thagdal to look afresh upon the old violent customs that originated on a forgotten 
planet in an inaccessible galaxy—then perhaps we are 
guilty! 
NONTUSVEL: Of course you aren't, Katy. I'm sure Cull didn't mean it that way. Why—many of the Host 
are of a peaceful 
temperament, unless the Firvulag do something hopelessly 
provocative... 
MAYVAR: And even then, there are those who eschew the plea-sures 
of punishing villains such as Delbaeth in favor of 
remaining securely at home here in the capital while others 
do the Questing. 
ALUTEYN: That's one on you, Cull. You never were one to do 
your own dirty work. 
NONTUSVEL: We will not quarrel! There will be no more talk 
of heresy. I forbid it. 

EADONE: Our Awful Queen is wise. Listen to her. 
NONTUSVEL: There is still another potential consequent of the 
Aiken Drum matter to be considered. Let us look again 
upon the plan of Lord Gomnol. Suppose it happened that, 
in the uncertain future, the operant genes of the woman 
Elizabeth merged not with the seed of our beloved Thagdal, 
but with that of this fully human male! 
EADONE: Tana have mercy! There is the true threat to our racial destiny! 
ALUTEYN: The penalty for bearing a human child is death for 
parents and offspring. 
NONTUSVEL: How could this be enforced if Aiken Drum were High King? 
IMIDOL: A race of operant humans contending against us! 
RIGANONE: We would be crushed. CULLUKET: Let our loyal Lady Kingmaker explain this away! 
MAYVAR: I can only do my Making as the Goddess prompts 
me. 
IMIDOL: And Gomnol! Is our human brother manipulating the 
lot of us in some new experiment, as he has been manip-ulating 
us ever since he came through the time-gate? 
GOMNOL: Perhaps you would like to challenge me for the Guild 
Presidency in the manifestation of powers, Coercive Brother? 
NONTUSVEL: Oh, no! Now stop this, all of you! There is only 
one way we will ever untangle this muddle. 
EADONE: Tell us, Sister and Mother. 
NONTUSVEL: We must demand a ruling of Brede..EADONE + ALUTEYN: Excellent. The Thagdal will surely 
agree. 
RIGANONE: But there's no telling what that weird old Two-Face 
will say! She never involves herself in the affairs of the 
High Kingdom. She's no true Tanu at a l l ... she's something 
else altogether. 
ANEAR: Something dreadful. EADONE: Listen to me, you fearful young ones. Brede is the 
oldest and wisest, our guide and our first benefactor when 
an entire galaxy was arrayed against us. She had the original 
vision that inspired transport of the first Comers to our Exile 
here. 
KUHAL: True, Lady Sciencemaster. But let us also remember 
that Brede brought both Tanu and Firvulag to this Earth. In 
some deep way she is linked in destiny to both races. We 
cannot be sure— 
NONTUSVEL: We can only hope that she will choose what is 
best for both. We may even pray that she will choose what 
is best for all three races!... And now, my dearest ones, I 
would have you link minds with me once again. But this 
time you will not sing the Song for our poor dead sister, 
Bybar, but for all of us living on this planet, exiled and 
afraid..13 
AFTER NEARLY TWO WEEKS OF QUESTING IT HAD COME TO this: a vast black hole in the mountain and a 
nasty choice. 
"What's wrong with chasing him underground?" Aiken Drum 
asked. Nodonn bestowed a pitying glance on his diminutive rival. 
"On foot? With no bear-dogs to help catch his scent and distract him?" 
The two of them were sitting on thoroughly winded chalikos, 
waiting for the other leaders of the great Hunt to reach the ledge in front of the cave. Several 
dozen amphicyons milled 
about yowling their frustration. None ventured more than two 
or three meters into the cavern entrance, from which a chill, 
dampish exhalation flowed. "Let's take a peek at what's inside," Aiken suggested. He conjured up a 
fulgurant ball of energy like a floating star shell 
and sent it wafting into the dark cleft. The two Hunters followed 
its progress with their farsight. It came into a huge chamber all fanged with stalactites and 
stalagmites where there was a 
broad lake. On the far side a low arched passageway led deeper 

into the mountain and Aiken guided the psychoenergetic flare 
into this opening, through which an underground river flowed. The tunnel pinched and the roof 
lowered after about half a 
kilometer, and finally the stream flowed over a precipice into 
a void so black that the light of the flare could not illuminate it. For a moment the two 
metapsychics saw with their mind's 
eye a waterfall dropping like a length of gauze into nothingness. Then the flare was suddenly 
extinguished. 
A faint sound of laughter floated from the depths. 
"And up yours, too," Aiken said to the faraway Shape of Fire..The King's mount came scrambling up 
the rocky slope, 
followed closely by Stein—whom the monarch had taken a 
liking to, Lord Celadeyr of Afaliah, Lady Bunone Warteacher, 
and fifteen or so others of the party possessing the PK power 
to assist their faltering steeds in the climb. Because of Del-baeth's 
habit of bombarding pursuers with fireballs, it had not 
been possible for the Quest to take to the air. 
"Well?" growled Thagdal. 
"Gone to ground," said the Battlemaster. 
The King removed his diamond helm, slouched in the sad-dle, 
and chewed his golden mustache. "Damn it all to hell. 
After chasing him all this way," 
"He does it every time," Celadeyr of Afaliah remarked, 
shrugging aquamarine-armored shoulders. "Leads you from one 
plantation to the next. Lets you think you've got him trapped, 
then pops up outside your line, fries a few grays and anybody 
else he catches with his pants down, and then off to the races 
again. Daring you to nail him! That's our Delbaeth. But it 
always ends the same way—into some bloody cave, and the 
laugh's on you." 
"Damn smart for a Firvulag, Celo." 
The Lord of Afaliah spurred his chaliko through the rabble 
of bear-dogs to the cavern mouth. "Would I have asked for 
your help against an ordinary spook? Good thing for us Del-baeth 
is a maverick and doesn't fight in the Combat!.. .This 
is a new bolt-hole. At least we've managed to chase him farther 
west than ever before. This part of the Cordillera is way to 
hell and gone out on the Isthmus." 
The King spat. "Don't know where the devil we are, not 
being able to reconnoiter from the air. Steinie—you got any 
beer left?" 
The Viking passed a large canteen. 
Celadeyr said, "Now that the Shape of Fire's underground, 
it's safe to fly if you wish, Majesty. He'll stay holed up for 
several days now to rest. There'd be no danger at all flying 
back to Afaliah." 
"Give it up?" cried Stein. "We still got three days clear until 
the friggin' Truce! There's still a chance we could get him." 
The mounted assembly laughed. Bunone Warteacher, awe-some 
in a silvery bascinet that made her look like a bird of 
prey, said, "Delbaeth isn't coming out. Would you and your 
saucy master follow him in?" 
"Why not?" Stein asked, and once more the Hunters laughed..Aiken said to the King, "I told you I'd 
get him for you. I 
promised it, in fact. If I don't get Delbaeth, I'm screwed for 
the Grand Combat—right?" 
"Oddly phrased," said the King. His smile was affable. "But 
the conclusion is accurate. You've had ample opportunity to 
carry out your boastful proposal on this Quest. If we return to 
Muriah having failed, I'll consider your service-bid for Stein 
null and void. It would be proper to punish you for the insolence 

of having made the bid in the first place, but in consideration 
for your repair of the computer and several other worthwhile 
accomplishments, I feel disposed to generosity. You'll be el-igible 
to fight in the High Melee with the other gold-torc human 
warriors. But you may not aspire to the Heroic Encounters." 
"It is fitting," said Nodonn, glowing in the advancing dusk. 
A few bats began to zip out of the cave on their evening forays. 
"If we're packing it in," Celadeyr said, "Let's get down the 
mountain before any others ruin their mounts trying to climb 
up here." 
"Now just a damn minute," Aiken protested. "I didn't say 
I was giving up. There's still three days before the Truce... I'm 
going after Delbaeth. Into the cave." 
"And I'm going with him," Stein said. "Nobody's gonna 
auction me off like a prize steer again!" The mental and vocal 
babble greeting their declarations made it possible for Aiken 
to screen off Stein's unspoken thought: So what if I get killed? 
If any Tanu takes me for a slave, I'll never see Sukey again. 
"Make your foolhardy gesture if you must," said Nodonn. 
"Show us, if you can, that you know how to beat the Shape 
of Fire on his own home ground." Most of the Tanu crowded 
onto the ledge roared appreciation of the Battlemaster's remark. 
"The rest of us will return to Lord Celadeyr's castle for re-freshment, 
then fly on to the capital. Delbaeth will keep until 
after the Grand Combat. Should we discover your bones when 
we finally penetrate to his lair, we'll conduct suitable obsequies 
and sing for you the Song." 
More laughter. But in the midst, a protest. 
"So you object, Bleyn and Alberonn?" inquired the Battle-master. 
Two riders urged their beasts to the fore. Bleyn the Cham-pion 
was a hybrid, powerful in both PK and coercion, who sat 
at the High Table. Alberonn Mindeater, another hybrid, was 
one of the best warrior-illusionists. Both were of the faction.of Mayvar and both had helped to 
train Aiken and Stein in 
martial arts for their initiation. 
"It is not fitting that this company desert Lord Aiken here 
in the wilderness while he descends to challenge Delbaeth," 
Bleyn stated. "Shame on those who would hold a brave man's endeavor up to mockery." 
Nodonn only smiled. 
Alberonn said, "We two will await the return of Aiken and 
Stein. We will camp before this very cave mouth, praying for 
their success. We will wait for the three days, so that the time 
originally allotted for this Quest may be honorably fulfilled." 
"I also will wait," decided Bunone, "and my three warrior-maids. 
Aiken Drum is a man of singular talents! We, too, will 
pray that he survives." 
The High King threw up one flashing hand in a gesture of 
resignation. "Oh, very well! What's three more days? We've 
earned a little rest after chasing that damn spook the length of 
the Betics and never once daring to take to the air for fear of 
his fireballs. But if we stay here, Celo, you've got to fly us in 
some decent food and booze." 
The Lord of Afaliah said, "We can set up camp in the 
meadow below, near the torrent, where the attendants and the 
baggage train now wait. My son Uriel himself will lead a 
squadron of levitants to bring refreshment." 
"That's that, then," said the King. He glowered at Aiken. 
"Three days only! You hear me?" 
The golden manikin leapt from his saddle, knelt on one knee 
before the royal chaliko, and grinned under his golden visor. 
"Thank you for your patience, Awful Father. We'll bring you 

Delbaeth's balls for biddy-swabbers!" 
And then, while the Questers watched in incredulous si-lence, 
Aiken Drum and Stein took off their armor and stacked 
it in a pile just beside the cave entrance. They left all their 
weaponry except Stein's bronze sword and took from their 
saddlebags only the Viking's parcel of snack foods, the canteen 
of beer, and a thin golden box about the size of a pen case, 
which Aiken stuffed quickly into the front of his undertunic. 
Waggling an admonitory finger at Nodonn, the golliwog 
said, "No fair peeking after us, Sun-Face. Don't you chase us 
with flares." 
"I will not," the Battlemaster promised, his smile un-dimmed. 
"Then—goodbye, all!" said Aiken Drum..There was a soundless snap. 
Two extra bats joined the flock wheeling over the heads of 
the Hunt. After taking a few minutes to get used to their wings, 
the pair swooped down and disappeared into the darkness of 
Delbaeth's cave. 
"Hey, kid!" 
"Shh. Gotta be sure nobody's farsensing us. Wouldn't trust 
that fewkin' Archangel one AU's worth." 
"... Kid, what about the friggerty monster?" 
"Will you shut your snoose-chompin' yap? It's tough work, 
doing these different kinds of mind-bendery all at the same 
time." 
"Sorry." 
They hung from the roof of the cataract shaft by their tiny 
claws. The world was utterly, appallingly black. The waterfall 
made a hissing sound as it sprayed into the mountain's gut. A 
faraway rumble down below announced its drainage into an 
abyssal sump. 
The two bats could "see" by means of the sounds. 
At last Aiken said, "It's okay. They're all going down to 
the campsite. Nobody's making a real effort to farsense us. 
The least little screen'll take care of them now .. .Trouble is, 
Steinie, I don't really know how good at farsensing any of 
these Tanu biggies are. I'm certain that most of the exotics 
can't farsee underground. That's why the Firvulag live in caves 
and burrows. But the King, Nodonn, that damn Ran who does 
the PK stunts—they just might be able to figure some way to 
spot us through a klom of solid rock.. .just like I can." 
"Jeezuss God. Will you lay off the bragging and scan out 
where that torch-ass spook is holed up? Or don't you care if 
we get incinerated?" 
"We're not gonna get incinerated. Delbaeth isn't waiting in 
some cranny to ambush us. He's gone home. He knows nobody 
in this Exile world is stupid enough to follow him into the 
caves." 
"Ha ha. All right, Ace. Now that we're here—where the 
hell are we?" 
"We're in a better position to nab the spook than we were 
before, hemmed in by that mob of exotics. This is just the kind 
of chance I hoped for ever since we took off on this dumb 
monster hunt! A chance to go after Delbaeth without the rest 
of 'em watching how I kill him!"."You're not gonna zap him with your superbrain?" 
"Betcher sweet ass I'm not. I wouldn't have a chance in a 
mind-to-mind with Delbaeth. Neither would any of those Tanu 
turds—unless the Firvulag was taken completely by surprise. 
And fat chance of that happening, with that friggerty circus 
parade of three hundred knights of the Round Table whooping 
after him. Nope! There's only one way to take the Shape of 
Fire. My little old sweetheart, Mayvar, knew it." 

"Well how, for chrissake?" 
"I'm gonna cheat. Come on. Let's get outa here to some 
place where it's flat and dry and I'll show you." 
The two bats spiraled down the shaft. At the bottom they 
turned into pallid eyeless fish and went Whisking through the 
flooded tunnel of the sump, "seeing" the twists and turns of 
the rock pipe by means of pressure changes and the reflection 
of water currents, rather than the echolocation they had used 
while they were bats. They traveled for more than a kilometer 
before the stream broke into a large airfilled space. One fish 
leaped from the water—flopped back. Then both jumped up 
and metamorphosed into bats. A few moments later they were 
in human form again, sitting on a rock shelf beside the un-derground 
river while a small ball of incandescence hung in 
midair to furnish light. The cave ceiling two or three meters 
above was covered with a fantastic growth of crystal soda-straw 
formations, thin and delicate, each with a pendant drop 
of water at the tip. 
Aiken wasted no time admiring the scenery. He took the 
golden box from his shirt, manipulated the lid in some tricky PK fashion, and showed Stein what 
was inside: a single thin 
gray object about twenty cents in length, vaguely resembling 
a silvery length of punk with a wire stem. 
Stein frowned. "You know what that looks like? When I 
was a kid back in Illinois we had—" 
"That's what it is. Just one of these little things is gonna 
kill that shitfire Firvulag stone dead. A long time ago, some 
poor sucker brought this through the time-gate, thinking he'd 
liven up the Pliocene a little bit. Since they're perfectly harm-less, 
the people at the auberge had no objection. But when the 
guy stepped into Exile, his stuff was confiscated—and all but 
this one destroyed before Mayvar got hold of it. You know 
why? Because here, things like this are deadly! Not to hu-mans— 
not even torc-wearing humans—but to the exotics." 
"Iron." Stein was awestruck. "No iron tools here, no iron.implements, nothing iron at all. All 
glass, vitredur, bronze or 
other alloy, silver, gold, whatnot. But never any iron! Hell— 
why didn't anybody notice?" 
"How much iron did we use back in the Milieu in places where 
it showed? We were almost out of the iron age. You know what 
the Tanu and Firvulag call the stuff? Blood-metal! One prick and 
they're goners. Or, in the case of this thing—" 
"Jeez, yes!" Stein exclaimed. His expression became intent. 
"You're gonna do it, kid. I'm a believer at last. And after we 
finish off this Delbaeth, you're gonna help me escape with 
Sukey. And if any dumb Tanu tries to stop us—" 
"You stupid squarehead! You forgot your gray torc? And 
Sukey's silver one? The Tanu could track you anywhere. Relax! 
I got other plans. We'll all make it if you don't pull any more 
great moves like you did with Tasha." 
Aiken closed the golden box and put it back into his shirt. 
"Now sit still and shut up. I gotta track Delbaeth, and this 
X-ray vision thing is a hell of a lot tougher than you might 
think. Good thing these mountains aren't granite." 
"Naw. Limestone, sandstone, medium-grade schists, and 
other metamorphics down below at this end of the Med. Don't 
forget I used to work these rocks when I was a crust driller." 
"Shut up, dammit." 
The two of them sat there in their underwear. The psycho-energy 
flare went out as Aiken concentrated all of his power 
in his seeker sense. The only sounds were the drips from the 

slender calcite pipelets. 
Could I reach out, too? Stein wondered. Sukey had told him 
it was love that did it before, that broke through Dedra's coer-cive 
control. Was love strong enough to cross the thousand 
kilometers that separated him from Sukey, hidden back there 
in Muriah in the catacombs beneath Redact House? First, vis-ualize 
her in the mind's eye. (Easy when your optic nerves are 
getting input zilch.) There she is. Now tell her that you love 
her, that it's going to be all right, that you're safe, that you're 
going to come back, that you're going to w i n ... 
"I found him, Steinie! I found the fuckard!" 
The astral light snapped on. Stein passed a great hand over 
his eyes and wiped it on his hip. The attempt at farspeech 
hadn't worked. His head hurt. 
Reddish hair standing up like a charged mop, eyes seeming 
to snap with excitement, the trickster sprang to his feet and 
pointed toward a solid rock wall. "That direction. Maybe eight,.nine kloms and a couple hundred 
meters lower down. There's 
this fuzzy blob—a mental aura, I guess. Only living thing 
anywhere around. It's gotta be him." 
Stein sighed. "And all we have to do is walk through the 
wall." 
The golliwog was apologetic. "That's not my act, Steinie. 
I can't do interpenetration. Can't zap mountains, either, not 
so's you'd notice. We'll have to walk, fly, or swim. If Delbaeth 
got there from here, so can we. This whole lousy range is 
honeycombed with caves. It'll take a while finding our way 
through the maze." He looked grim. "But it better not take too 
long or we'll be into the Truce. That's when Firvulags go outa 
season until Grand Combat time." 
Stein looked at his wrist chronometer. "Half past eighteen 
hours, September twenty-seven, six million B.C." 
"Checko." 
"Just tell me one thing before you do your Dracula act, kid. 
Do we really turn into bats and fish and things when you say 
shazoom, or is it some kinda shape-shifting illusion thing and 
do we keep our regular bods all the time?" 
"Damned if I know," said Aiken Drum. "Hang onto that 
food and beer, pally—we're off!" 
They searched. 
Tunnels dry and flooded; great galleries where flowstone 
and stalactites and rippling curtains of thin rock fell like frozen 
creations of peach and vanilla ice cream; constricted slots and 
tortuous low corridors studded with sparkling calcite teeth; 
tumbled rockfalls where a cave ceiling had collapsed into piles 
of house-sized chunks; partially drained streamways gleaming 
with mud; dead-end holes that had to be retraced; tempting 
passages that took them in the wrong direction. 
They ate, and after a while, they slept. They woke and 
continued flying, swimming, walking, climbing. The food and 
beer were finished midway through the second day. There was 
plenty of water, but no bugs for bats, no edible bits floating in the subterranean waters that the 
men-fish could swallow to 
assuage the all-too-real spasms of their possibly illusory stom-achs. 
Aiken's mental screen was now projected only between 
them and the concentration of psychic energy that presumably 
marked Delbaeth. This hardly seemed to shift position at all 
now; perhaps the Shape of Fire took very long naps between.sorties, or perhaps the fuzzy aura 
marked something else al- together ... The bats flew down a long, sloping tunnel. For the first 
time since their descent, they were aware of a current of air 
against their flapping wing membranes. The mental voice of 

Aiken spoke to Stein on the intimate human mode: 
Don't think one solitary thing. Keep your mind quiet if you 
value your sweet ass. I don't think he can hear me on this 
mode but any squeak outa you would hit him S9 and wall to 
wall. 
The two bats, now totally enveloped in the heaviest mind-barrier 
that Aiken could conjure, came to a ninety-degree bend 
in the corridor. They fluttered around the corner and saw light 
ahead—orangey yellow and flickering gently. The passage was 
dry. There were huge footprints in the dust. 
Drifting among the rock formations, the bats approached 
the lighted area. It was a large open camber full of looming 
monoliths almost like shrouded human figures, together with 
complex tiers of flowstone that resembled gigantic gilled fungi. 
The bats flew up toward the ceiling to a ledge that jutted far 
out over the central area of the floor. There, hidden from the 
sight of anyone below, the bats turned into Aiken and Stein. 
Silence. Don't move. Don't rattle that damn sword scab-bard. 
Don't do one friggerty thing. 
Aiken crept toward the edge of the formation on his stomach 
and peered down. A large fire burned within a well-made cir-cular 
hearth. Piles of barkless tree trunks were neatly stacked 
in an alcove. Other parts of the cavern were furnished with a 
table, chairs, a bedstead of gargantuan proportions having a 
canopy and side curtains of the finest Tanu brocade, and any 
number of carved wooden chests and shelves. Leathern bags 
bulging with mysterious contents stood at the base of one pillar. 
Near another was a framework hung with fish netting edged 
with wooden floats. The floor was carpeted in glossy pelts— 
some dark, some spotted. Most of the dirty dishes on the table 
seemed to be large mollusk shells. 
Drawn up close to the fire was a species of overstuffed chair 
upholstered in gray hide. In the chair, quite asleep, was a 
humanoid exceeding the tall Tanu in height and vastly more 
robust of build. His head had a tangled brick-colored mane of 
hair and a bushy beard. He wore a leather shirt with the front 
lacing open, showing the reddish pelt of his chest. His breeches 
were scarlet. He had taken off his boots and extended his huge.feet toward the fire. Now and then 
the toes wiggled. A cyclic 
noise reminiscent of a malfunctioning ore crusher told Aiken 
Drum that Delbaeth, the Shape of Fire, most formidable wild 
Firvulag in the southern reaches of the Many-Colored Land, 
was snoring. Aiken opened the golden box and removed the pencil-slim 
gray object. Hefting the little thing, he seemed to calculate a 
trajectory. He ignited the tip of his secret weapon with his 
creative metafunction. 
The sparkler burst into vivid white light, throwing out glow-ing 
iron filings like tiny meteorites. Aiken held the firework 
at arm's length. 
Down below, Delbaeth surged from his chair, bellowing. 
His body, nearly three meters tall, was transformed into a 
blazing mass that reached fiery arms toward the ceiling ledge 
and began to mold a ball of fire between incandescent paws. 
Aiken threw the sparkler, guiding it with whatever PK he 
could muster through the thick psychic screen he had erected 
around Stein and himself. Delbaeth's fireball arced up, dead 
on target, and bounced. There was another echoing cry from the monster. The fragile 
firework struck his flaming form and fell to the cave floor, still 
spitting sparks. Delbaeth's fire was extinguished. He crumpled 
slowly, almost seeming to melt into the ground, and did not 
move again. 

"Come on!" Aiken cried. 
The two bats flew down and became men once more. They 
stood beside the awesome carcass, and Stein said, "See where 
it hit him? Right on the forehead, because he was looking up. 
One tiny little burn with a hot iron wire!" 
There was a leather bucket full of water beside the table. 
Aiken hoisted it and poured a stream over the still-coruscating 
sparkler. It hissed and went out. A hole had been burned in 
one fur rug, ruining it. 
"You did it!" Stein swept up the little man and crushed him 
in a bear hug. "You did it!" Dropping Aiken, Stein howled to 
the stalactites: "Sukey, babe, we did it!" 
Aiken frowned, then laughed out loud. "I'll be damned, 
Viking. She did hear you! Maybe you can't pick her up, but 
I get this little weak farspeak whisper. Aw...you'll never 
guess. She loves you." 
Stein grabbed up the bucket and emptied it over Aiken. 
"Thanks," said the golliwog. "I needed that. Now cut off.his head and let's get out of here. We've 
gotta find the shortest route to the open air and fly back to bedoozle the royalty. Not 
to sweat, though! We're one whole day early!" 
Stein began to draw his great bronze sword from its amber-studded 
sheath. But when the blade was halfway out he froze and tilted his head. "Listen! Hear that?... 
It's a lot clearer now 
than it was up next to the ceiling with that spook snoring." 
Aiken cocked an ear. A slow, deep boom vibrated the rocks. 
Several seconds passed. Boom. Like the tolling of some huge 
bell the sound repeated. Boom. Slow. Inexorable. 
"Do you know what that is, kid?" Stein asked. "It's surf. 
Somewhere just the other side of that rock wall is the Atlantic 
Ocean." 
THE END OF PART ONE..1 
FELICE WALKED THE RUINS OF FINIAH. By the time that the Truce was in its third day, the minor 
eruption of lava from the old Kaiserstuhl volcano had come to 
an end. Streams of once molten rock solidified into clinkery 
masses—fat, rounded, and branched like monstrous roots where 
they had flowed out from the central mineworkings into the 
streets and arcades of the devastated city. It had rained heavily. 
Buildings that had been white or golden and rose, or blue-green 
and silver with the colors of the Creative Lord Velteyn, were 
now streaked and smeared with ashy mud. Ash had smothered 
the gardens and blasted the foliage from most of the ornamental 
trees. The central plaza, where Felice prowled, was a tangle 
of burnt-out shops, shredded awnings, broken carts and trades-men's 
booths, and bodies half-buried in cinders and muck. 
Giant ravens as long as Felice's arms pecked at the swollen 
remains of chalikos, hellads, ramapithecines, and people. The 
scavengers were not disturbed by the passing of the small woman 
dressed in shining black. Perhaps they took her for one of 
themselves. 
There were noises. The ravens uttered their pruk pruk calls. 
A broken water conduit gushed and flooded down a flight of 
stairs, washing clean the corpses of gray-torc soldiers and Low- life, invaders. In a cul-de-sac 
near the palace of Lord Velteyn, 
nearly a dozen uninjured ramas in ruined aquamarine tabards 
huddle together, whimpering. A sound of human groans came 
from a porter's house adjacent to the main palace approach. 
Felice ignored it and walked toward the entrance of Velteyn's 
mansion, an iron-tipped arrow nocked and ready in her com-pound 
bow. She had many other arrows in a shoulder quiver, 
all with stained shafts. There had been a few stubborn grays.down at the river landing determined 
to fight on, even though 

their Tanu overlords had fled; and down in the artisans' quarter, 
a bareneck woman had come rushing out of a devastated glass-crafter's 
workshop, brandishing a vitredur machete and crying 
vengeance on the despoilers of Finiah even as Felice shot her 
in the throat. 
Humans were too irreligious to hold to the Truce. Long after 
the Firvulag and Tanu had quit the burning wreck of the city, 
Lowlife warriors continued to fight against those of their fellow 
humans who remained loyal to the exotics. Captured grays, as 
well as the few silvers who fell into the invaders' hands, were 
hustled before a guerilla tribunal where a Lowlife officer showed 
them an iron chisel and an iron knife and bade them choose: 
"Live free or die." A surprising proportion had opted for death 
rather than the removal of their mind-amplifying collars. 
Felice entered the palace. The carrion birds were absent 
here, but there were flies, swift-scuttling rodents, and an ap-palling 
stench. The bodies of guards and servitors were heaped 
behind improvised barricades of furniture and demounted doors. 
Many of the defenders had died without a mark upon them, 
faces contorted by the mind-blasting attack of the Firvulag. 
Except for the buzzing of insects, the rustle and squeak of 
rats, and the sighing sound of wind through smashed panes of 
colored glass, the palace of Lord Velteyn was quiet in its ruin. 
The little woman in black penetrated deeper into the apartments 
of the Great Ones, leaping over the piled corpses of human 
retainers who had fought an increasingly desperate rearguard 
action as the invading army hunted their trapped exotic masters. 
Felice came to a great open door of bronze, studded with 
green stones. Bodies in Lowlife buckskin and homespun min-gled 
with those in palace livery to clog its threshold. And here, 
for the first time, there were also Firvulag bodies, some squat, 
some taller than humans or Tanu and as burly as fairytale giants; 
all were attired in the gold-chased obsidian armor of Pallol 
One-Eyes's elite corps and all had been dispatched by iron-tipped 
weapons that Velteyn's human guard had presumably 
wrested from the Lowlives. 
Calmly, Felice pulled a spear from a dead shape-shifter and 
used it for an alpenstock as she climbed over the noisome 
mound blocking the doorway. Inside the room, which was an 
elaborate bedchamber reduced to a shambles by the fighting, 
were six bodies attired in colored-glass armor. Four men and 
one Tanu woman were bloodied, transfixed by iron-pointed.arrows. The second woman, a gold-torc 
human armored in sapphire blue, bore no wounds and had presumably succumbed 
to mental assault. 
Felice removed her hoplite helmet and set it upon a large 
bedside stand. On a lower shelf, incongruous in undisturbed 
tidiness, were a golden ewer and basin. The girl filled the basin 
with water and set it on top of the table. For a moment, she 
stood looking down at the corpse of the human woman. In 
death, her azure eyes showed wide pupils, oddly emphatic in 
a face as pale as chalk. Long chestnut hair spread on the carpet 
in a nimbus around the bare head; her helmet lay nearby. The 
slender fingers in jeweled blue-plate gauntlets were hooked 
over a golden torc. 
Like an acolyte enacting a ritual, Felice knelt. The rigor 
had left the dead hands and the torc was easily freed from their 
grip. The knobbed front catch clicked. The girl pivoted the 
collar on its back hinge and slipped it from around the livid 
throat. Rising, she went to the basin, dipped the gold several 
times, and dried it upon a soft towel. 
Then Felice fastened the torc about her own neck. 

The reality opened to her. She uttered a piercing cry. 
This... so it was like this. All of it had been hidden within 
her, battened down and denied, so feared by the weaker ones 
all around her. But now open, released, and ready to be used. She went out onto the balcony of the 
death room. Trembling, 
vision partly blurred by the tears of her joy, she looked over 
the ruins of Finiah. There was the wide Rhine, the heights of 
the Vosges, High Vrazel itself on the western skyline, where 
King Yeochee and Sharn-Mes and the other Firvulag were 
doubtless still celebrating the triumph over their ancient Foe. 
There were the high passes she had come through alone, too 
late for the war, passing Chief Burke and Khalid Khan and the 
remnant of the Lowlife force conducting newly liberated human 
survivors of Finiah to the bottomland camp where they would 
await the judgment of Madame Guderian. 
Gold warm at her throat, Felice began to laugh. The sound 
swelled on the wind until it reverberated over the wasted city. 
The ravens, shocked out of their aplomb, took wing..2 
SHARN-MES THE YOUNG CHAMPION REGARDED THE RIOTOUS scene in the Hall of the Mountain King and shook 
his head in 
humorous wonderment. 
"Just look at that gang of stewed fewmets. It'll be at least 
three days' sleep to work off this three days' drunk. You know, 
Ayf, this is going to play havoc with our travel schedule. The 
armor and weaponry will have to be refurbished before we head 
south unless we want to go into the Grand Combat looking like 
a tatty rabble." 
"There's still plenty of time." Ayfa, leader of the Warrior 
Ogresses, tossed off her bumper of mead and helped herself 
to a refill. "The lads and lasses are entitled to a celebration. 
It's been forty years since we've had anything worth getting 
drunk about. Who cares if we miss some of the prelims down 
at the White Silver Plain? The high-ass crowd aren't about to 
start any main events without us." 
"I suppose," Sharn agreed, "that we do deserve a party." 
The two great captains were sequestered in a snug gallery 
that ordinarily accommodated musicians at formal feasts. But 
there was nothing formal about the action now taking place 
below them. All of the Firvulag veterans of the brief Finiah 
campaign, together with most of the rest of the citizenry of 
High Vrazel, seemed to have crowded into the royal audience 
cavern to cheer the unexpected victory. 
Brown ale and mead and cyser and blackberry brandy foun-tained 
up from hollow stalagmites right into the waiting mugs 
of those merrymakers who were still on their feet. Enough 
pastries, meats, and other party food remained to make the 
oaken tables creak under the weight. One mob in front of King 
Yeochee's empty throne was playing a type of blindman's bluff.in which the hooded female 
protagonist had taken the game's title quite literally. Another hilarious crowd surrounded the two 
heroes of the battle, Nukalavee and Skinless and Bles Four-Fang, 
who vied with one another to see who could create the 
most ridiculously obscene illusory body. Points were awarded 
by the cheers, jeers, and occasional retchings of the onlookers. 
More serious-minded revelers (and the maudlin drunks) 
gathered about a crookbacked goblin bard who had reached the 
one-hundred-sixty-fifth verse of a lugubrious ballad of doomed 
Firvulag lovers. Cheerier souls were concocting ingenious new 
stanzas to the soldiers' beloved drinking song, " A Princess 
Must Never Have Fleas," detailing those eccentricities that the 
royal demoiselle might legitimately expect to get away with. 
Warriors of the walking wounded, cosseted by plump little 

wenches, bragged of their late derring-do. Superannuated stay-athomes 
muttered into their beer that the reduction of Finiah 
couldn't possibly compare to certain ancient affrays in which 
they had participated during the good old days. 
Queen Klahnino supervised the safe retirement of fallen 
celebrants, who were dragged away into alcoves and packed 
cheek by jowl to sleep it off. King Yeochee wandered around 
in bare feet and a stained golden robe, his crown tilted over 
one ear, kissing all of the ladies and quite a number of the 
gentlemen as well. Pallol the Battlemaster, still disdainful of 
the enterprise but always ready for a party, had succumbed to 
a surfeit of sidecars—another legacy of the insidious Lowlives. 
He lay snoring in the King's crystal grotto, his huge head resting 
in the lap of the resigned concubine, Lulo. 
"Yes," Sharn repeated himself at length. "We definitely 
deserve a celebration... What do you suppose the Lowlives 
are up to?" 
"I'll look," said Ayfa, who possessed more farsight than 
the majority of her race. She was a handsome creature if one 
overlooked the excessively developed arm muscles, a concom-itant 
of her prowess with the two-handed sword. Her hair was 
apricot-colored and her broad face freckled. Like most Fir-vulag, 
she had dark, twinkling eyes. She had shed her armor 
and wore a rumpled kirtle and blouse of madder rose, which 
clashed with her hair. 
"Yes, there they are. The human prisoners, or refugees, or 
whatever you call 'em, are installed in the old staging-area 
camp. But Burke and his cronies are slogging along through.Ravine Pass toward Hidden Springs. 
They're getting rained on." "Good," said Sharn. "Maybe it'll rust their perishing iron." 
He took a pull from his beaker and wiped his lips with a furry 
paw. "Dammit, Ayf, that's a bad business—using the blood- metal. Unprecedented! You know, when we 
trapped that bunch 
of Tanu engineers near the smeltery, one of 'em let off a really 
heavy curse before he died. I can still hear it: 'The Goddess 
will avenge us. Accursed through the world's age be those who 
resort to the blood-metal. A bloody tide will overwhelm 
them...'" 
"Well, it seems to me that the curse is for the humans, not us. We'd always planned to put the 
Lowlives to the sword once 
they'd served our purposes." 
"But we're only too willing to use them—and their iron— 
in the meantime! I hate it, Ayfa. It's a Lowlife way of doing 
battle, not our way. Old Pallol was bitching about how we'd 
surrendered our ancient honor just by fighting alongside hu-mans 
.. . and how the iron was so obscene that it made a travesty 
of our whole combat-philosophy. I can't help agreeing. How 
can war be glorious with such an ignoble weapon? It puts the 
mightiest Firvulag or Tanu hero on the same level as some 
half-starved human pipsqueak with a compound bow. It's un-fair!" 
Ayfa grunted. "I suppose the Tanu have been fighting 
f a i r ... with their chalikos and bear-dogs that have turned the 
Hunts into massacres! Or the human cavalry and charioteers 
in the Grand Combat who've been whipping the shit out of us 
for the past forty years!" 
"Aaah. You women never did appreciate the fine points of 
chivalry!" "No—we're willing to fight dirty to win." The female war- rior served herself another 
great tankard of mead. "And speak-ing 
of that—did you see how the Lowlife infantry dealt with 
the mounted Foe in Finiah?" 
Sharn acknowledged the fact with a surly nod. "Unsporting! 
That's not our way." 

"Screw our way. The chalikos weren't the Tanu way, either, 
until that human animal tamer came along... Now you listen 
to me, big boy. There won't be any iron weapons to help us in the Grand Combat this year, but you 
can bet your sweet 
filberts that we will adopt those new antichaliko tactics of the 
Lowlives. This go-around, those gray-torc troopers are in for.a helluva surprise! I've already got 
the armorers working on 
the modification. Easiest thing in the world." 
"It could make a difference," he conceded. "If we can get 
the warriors to accept it." 
"I'll leave the persuasion to you," she told him, smiling. 
Then her expression changed. "Keep still for a minute while I 
go back to my farsight of the Lowlives coming from Finiah ... I 
get a few under three hundred surviving irregulars going over 
the pass and maybe twice that many captives and casualties 
down in the Rhineside camp. Most of the refugees are bare-necks... 
No—wait. Some are too well dressed. By damn, 
they've got to be ex-grays or silvers with their torcs chiseled 
off! Noncombatants. Maybe scientific types, special-talent ar-tificers. 
Old Madame Guderian will make good use of them, 
you can bank on it!" 
"I wonder just how loyal to her those liberated townees will 
be, though?" Sharn was skeptical. "The humans who craved 
freedom the most tended to be the newcomers and the psychos. 
The people who'd been here for a while settled down under 
Tanu domination even without being torced. A life of freedom 
in the wild greenwood is going to be as appealing to those 
easy-goers as a case of hives." 
"Hush. I'm looking for Felice." 
"Oh, that one. The one you'll have to take into your crew 
if—" 
"—if she finds a golden torc and goes metapowerful. I could 
strangle that Yeochee for pushing the dirty work off on me! 
As if the Combat wasn't tough enough for us women these 
days... Oh-oh." 
"Spotted her?" 
"She's in a room of Velteyn's mansion. Wearing a torc. 
And she's looting a body of its glass armor. So much for 
Yeochee's idea. This kid is way ahead of him, making her own 
Combat plans!" 
"Cheer up." Sharn climbed to his feet, yawned hugely, and 
scratched his hairy chest through the open front of his tunic. 
"You're rid of her, anyhow. It'll take her a while to get used 
to the torc. And there's no guarantee that her latent rnetafa-culties 
will measure up to her nerve, in any case. Even if she 
did mastermind Epone's killing and help bring back the Spear, 
she's still only a young girl. Maybe coercing animals is the 
only power she's got.".Ayfa's eyes came back into focus. "Te only knows. I guess I'm just too 
tired now to give much of a damn." 
Sharn gave her a hand and hauled her up. "It's been a short 
war and a long party. What say we make our duty to the King 
and Queen and amble on home?" He gathered their black-glass 
armor by the straps and slung it onto his back. 
"Good thinking," Ayfa agreed. She clapped her companion 
on one shoulder and, rising on tiptoe, kissed the end of his 
grubby nose. "I hate to think of the overtime we're going to 
owe the babysitter.".3 
THE GUARDIANS IN THEIR WHITE TUNICS STOOD READY AROUND 
the square of bare granite that had been marked off with rounded 
stones. There were soldiers as well this morning, in consid-eration 
of the visit of the Most Exalted Personages. Thagdal, 

Eadone, Gomnol, and the two brothers Nodonn and Velteyn 
kept well back from the vicinity of the time-portal and waited 
for the manifestation with the stoicism that dignitaries invari-ably 
assume when they are obliged to inspect some important 
but depressing activity taking place at an inconvenient hour. 
Pitkin the Castellan said, "It's just dawn, Exalted Ones. 
Here they come." 
A block of air above the granite began to shimmer as if 
suddenly heated. Four figures materialized within the singu-larity 
and hovered some thirty centimeters above the surface 
of the rock. 
"Sindbad the Sailor, a Joe Meek mountain-man type, one 
moribund hash aficionado complete with hubble-bubble, and 
a classic British birdwatcher," Pitkin rattled off in snap ap-praisal. 
"The drugger's for the discard, I'm afraid; wasted to 
a shadow. But the others will serve." 
The guardians had darted forward to seize the arms of the 
time-travelers and assist them as they stepped down the gap 
that separated the invisible floor of Professor Guderian's device 
from the solid ground of Pliocene Earth. 
"Fortuitous that they don't materialize inside a mass of bed-rock, 
isn't it?" Pitkin remarked. "This region has undergone 
many vicissitudes, geologically speaking." 
Sindbad had been separated from his scimitar, and the other 
dazed timefarers were being frisked for iron by a guardian with 
a metal detector. Pitkin said, "That new iron-sniffer of the.Craftsmaster's is a great 
improvement. No more worries about 
missed contraband... Ah. There goes the tail-field" back for 
the second lot." 
On the next cycle the time-portal admitted a young man in 
a suit of white denim carrying a crossbow; a goateed chap 
costumed as Queen Elizabeth I, whose farthingale skirts were 
a dreadful nuisance to his fellow embarkees, a deeply tanned 
woman wearing an Atalanta peplum and buskins; and a well-rejuvenated 
black man in a dacot lounge suit, draped with a 
dozen extremely expensive AV recorders. 
"All serviceable stock," Pitken said. "Don't be fooled by 
Good Queen Bess. There's probably a useful technician under 
that pearl-studded red w i g ... Now let's see what kind of im-pedimenta 
we rate today." 
The temporal field sprang into existence once more and 
guardians hastened to remove three large containers labeled 
MEDICATIONS, a case of Canadian Club, a papillon dog yapping 
hysterically inside its mesh carrier, a twenty-liter carboy of 
"Joy," a set of Larousse's Grand Dictionnaire Universel du 
XIXeme Siecle Francais, and a contrabassoon. 
"After these new arrivals are processed, they go to the hold-ing 
area, as you know, Exalted Ones. Because of the emer-gency, 
we have set up a temporary stockade by walling off 
sections of the outer ward, transferring the bear-dogs to exterior 
pens. In this way we can accommodate most of Lord Velteyn's 
refugees from Finiah in relative comfort within the castle proper 
until they are able to move on to Muriah. It's fortunate that 
this disaster took place at Truce time when there are extra 
supplies and transport available for those traveling down to the 
games. And of course the security matter is much more easily 
dealt with at this time as well." 
"Sounds like you've got things in hand," the King muttered 
grudgingly to the Castellan. 
"We have Lord Gomnol to thank for the initial disaster-relief 
planning. Castle Gateway was the logical receiving area, 

of course, and we were able to rush help northward in time to 
meet the refugees on the eastern shore of the Lac de Bresse 
just five days after the—uh—exodus from Finiah. Now, if 
you'd care to step into my office, Exalted Ones, I can go over 
the revised distribution system for the time-travelers that com-pensates 
for the temporary suspension of the Finiah run. There 
are also preliminary overviews of Castle Gateway's role in.laborforce procurement for the 
reconstruction and pacification operations." 
"Thank you, Pitkin," Gomnol said. "We won't trouble you 
for that now. I'll meet with you later myself to finalize the 
concentration of time-travelers during the Truce interim." 
The Castellan bowed, excused himself, and hurried back 
up the path leading to the fortress. Only the five Exalted Per-sonages 
and a small squad of soldiers waiting at a discreet 
distance now remained in the time-portal area. The sun was 
well over the brow of the eastern highlands. 
"Sometimes," the King said, looking after Pitkin with a 
peeved expression, "the efficiency of you humans really de-presses 
me. No righteous indignation. No avowals of ven-geance 
or fealty. Just revised distribution systems and 
preliminary overviews!" 
The Lord Coercer laughed in a genial fashion. "Vengeance 
is the Battlemaster's department. Mine is making certain that 
this disaster is confined to the Finiah region and neutralized as 
quickly as possible to minimize its impact on the socioecon-omy. 
If it weren't for the importance of the barium mines, I'd 
be inclined to write Finiah off." 
"Why, you arrogant little squeakpoop!" Velteyn's face was 
suffused with a red glare. "You're talking about my home! The 
cradle of Tanu culture on this planet! The City of Lights!" 
"The lights," Gomnol said, unperturbed, "have gone out. 
Finiah is in ruins. The Foe used brilliant strategy to attack it. 
It's awkwardly situated, on the wrong side of the Rhine and 
too far away from our other population centers. There are 
Firvulag on one side of it and Howlers on the other—and 
Madame Guderian and her rustic irregulars making merry in 
between. Of all our cities, it was the ripest for surprise attack." 
"I've kept it safe for five hundred years!" Velteyn shouted. 
"Once we get the walls back up and some reinforcements for 
the Flying Hunt, we'll have it as secure as ever. We'll wipe 
out Guderian's outlaws by organizing a Quest through the Vosges 
to destroy their settlements. Once the Lowlife nests are burned 
out, the Firvulag will crawl back into their own holes just as 
they've always done. They never would have mobilized for 
the attack at all if it hadn't been for that obscene old woman 
and her damned iron." 
"It may not be as easy as you think to put down the hostile 
humans, Creative Brother," Eadone told Velteyn. "And I'm 
afraid that Lord Gomnol raises a serious point about the isolated.position of Finiah. In the early 
years, when there were fewer 
of us and fewer Firvulag, your little walled city on the prom-ontory 
was at a strategic advantage. But today it is trapped 
within a web of inimical forces. Now that the humans are aware 
of the power of iron, they'll make dreadful use of it. Even a 
handful of Lowlives will be able to waylay caravans and troop 
columns, attack your plantations, perhaps set up a blockade in 
the river that could reduce your citizenry to starvation. There 
is no way you can be supplied by land. The Black Forest massif 
behind you is too formidable a barrier. Neither could your 
armed forces be reinforced by land. Soldiers would have to 
cross the Rhine to reach you from our other northern strong-holds— 

from Goriah, Burask, or Roniah. Even rebuilding your 
city will be a very difficult task because of the length of the 
lines of supply." 
Velteyn's flaming face went almost purple. "But we must 
rebuild! The destruction wasn't total. By no means! Almost all 
of our noncombatant Tanu citizens survived. Six hundred and 
eighty-nine airlifted to safety by me, by Lady Dectar, and by 
our gold-torc human brother Sullivan-Tonn." 
The King said, "But you lost most of the knights. And more 
than four thousand humans—silvers, grays, and barenecks— 
and every single rama! The whole damn working populace 
either dead, taken prisoner by that Tana-bedamned old harri-dan, 
or run off into the bushes where the Howlers or the wild 
animals will finish them off." 
"The plantations are still secure! And the military outposts. 
We can rebuild, Awful Father! We can make Finiah impreg-nable. 
We'll bring in more PK and coercer adepts to strengthen 
our mental capability." 
For the first time, Nodonn Battlemaster spoke. "We will 
have to reopen the mine. That is self-evident, unless we dis-cover 
a new source of the vital barium ore. But there can be 
no thought of restoring Finiah to its former glory. Its day as a 
gracious and venerable seat of culture has passed. In future, it 
must present an austere but secure face to our Foe. We will 
rebuild it as a fortified mining settlement.. .but that's all." 
Velteyn's entire body reacted as if from a physical assault. 
His mind screamed. 
O my Brother what do you say how can you woundsoulflay 
me disgracedegrade me before my people a battlechampion 
fallen unavengedunrestoredabandoned to human/Firvulag der-ision 
+ Tanu pityscorn ....Nodonn turned away. He walked to the empty granite plat- form of the timeportal 
and stood in the middle of it, aurora-hued 
robes bright in the sunrise. His immense voice rang in 
their minds and ears. 
"Blame this! From this came your pain, Brother! From this 
source of rottenness and deadly peril that has seduced us from 
our ancient way! Cursed be the woman who first opened the 
time-gate to invading humankind. We will all of us be mourning 
for a world forever lost unless we have the courage to shut the 
humans out before it is too late. If we continue our fatal de-pendence 
upon them, the death of Finiah will be nothing in 
comparison to the death of the Many-Colored Land!" 
Eadone said, "I could almost believe it now. And yet—" 
"You're wrong, Nodonn!" Thagdal said. "You've been trying 
to sell that prophecy of doom ever since they first started com-ing. 
But look at us! We're stronger now than we ever were 
before. It's a damn shame about Finiah. The city was a shrine 
to our pioneer heritage. But, let's face it—a bloody incon-venient 
place to get to or from, for all its picturesqueness and 
charm and pretty lights and all!.. .Tell you what, Velteyn, 
son! We'll build you a new city in some better place. How's 
that sound?" 
Gomnol joined the King in persuasion. "Perhaps on the 
shore of the Lac de Bresse. We can cut a new road from it to 
Goriah and open a whole new region for exploitation. Just as 
soon as the Combat is behind us, we can begin the planning. 
All of the other cities will contribute to its building, and you 
can have every one of the time-travelers for the next two years 
as a population base. We'll build you a new Finiah even better 
than the old. Proper streets and drains, proper water system 
and access, proper urban planning and defensive works. What 

do you say to that?" 
Nodonn said: Proper/human? 
Gomnol said: Rather wattledaubhuts handcrafted You? 
Eadone said: Take comfort our Mourning Brother. We will 
see you restored never fear. Go now to your LadyWife 
+ sorrowing folk and bid them hope. 
"Yes." Velteyn lifted his head and the psychic luminosity 
faded. He spoke aloud. "It is a good plan, Awful Father, and 
I stand humbly grateful before your generosity." And to No-donn: 
"If you think me lacking in courage, Brother Battle-master, 
I'll prove differently at the Grand Combat. I confess 
that the battle-joy went out of me with this disaster... but by.game-time I'll be a warrior 
restored. The Firvulag will pay a 
thousand times over for their unholy alliance with the Lowlives. As for the human despoilers—iron 
or no iron, we will see 
them screaming in the Great Retort as they offer their lives to 
the Goddess at the Combat's glorious end!" "Well said," observed the High King. "And now that the 
future is assured, I believe it is safe to go into the Castle for 
breakfast.".4 
THE REFUGEE CAMP AND FIELD HOSPITAL HAD BEEN SET UP IN 
the former invasion staging area in the Rhine bottomland. With 
the Tanu withdrawal to Castle Gateway and the retreat of Fi-niah's 
loyalist humans to the lake forts, the riverside was secure 
enough while the Truce prevailed. The wisdom of Old Man 
Kawai had dictated that the unfortunates not be sheltered in 
Hidden Springs village. 
"It is a matter of simple psychology," he told Peopeo Mox-mox 
Burke. "If we bring them to our canyon they will want 
to stay there, where there is ready-made housing and a vestige 
of civilization. But we cannot feed five or six hundred people 
indefinitely, nor will our buildings and sanitary facilities ac-commodate 
such a number. And the Firvulag bring in fresh 
stragglers every day! No—these refugees must be motivated 
to establish new settlements of their own. For this reason we 
must assemble them in a spartan campsite, care for their dis-abilities, 
furnish them with equipment and guides, and disperse 
them as rapidly as possible before the post-Combat Truce ends 
and the Tanu begin their countermeasures." 
It was Khalid Khan who came up with the suggestion for 
the Iron Road. The metalsmith pointed out that the wilderness 
smeltery should become the site of a new human stronghold. 
Other smaller settlements could be strung along the bank of 
the Moselle to secure the trail between the iron workings and 
Hidden Springs. 
"Provided the Tanu don't return in force too soon after the 
Truce's end," Khalid had said, "we can secure this whole region for Lowlife humanity by producing 
quantities of iron. The 
refugees can support themselves by making it after we help 
them to get established. I think we can bank on the Howlers.clearing out once word of the iron is 
passed around. But a 
massive Tanu Quest would be another matter, of course." 
"If the next two phases of my plan succeed," Madame Gud-erian 
had said, "there will be no Quest." 
Seven days following the attack on Finiah, Madame Gud-erian 
and Chief Burke came on chalikos to meet with Kawai 
for a last inspection tour of the refugee camp before proceeding 
south. The old woman and the tall Native American dismounted 
and tied their beasts to bushes near a stream, then walked with 
the aged Japanese into the grove with its rows of palmetto-thatched 
lean-tos and other rather squalid shelters. The area 
was becoming garbage-strewn and fetid. 

"We have tried to have the refugees police the area," Kawai 
said in a low voice, "but many are still in a shocked and 
depressed state and indifferent to personal hygiene and orderly 
behavior. There was a bit of trouble yesterday, as Chief Burke 
has doubtless told you. A group of perhaps forty, led by five 
de-collared gray soldiers, insisted upon being allowed to pro-ceed 
to Fort Onion River on the lake. We procured an escort 
of Firvulag and sent them away. It would have been useless 
to detain them." 
"We did not lose any of the doctors?" Madame was anxious. 
"Or the glass technicians?" 
"The medical personnel remained with us," Kawai said. 
"They were not willingly enslaved. One glassblower is gone. 
We have also lost the printer, several skilled stonemasons, some 
weavers and jewelers." 
The old woman attempted a chuckle. "We will not miss the 
latter, at any rate." Her voice was hoarse and she coughed 
often. During the aerial bombardment of Finiah, when she lay 
unconscious on the floor of the flyer, she had inhaled fumes 
from cabin materials set on fire by Velteyn's lightning balls. 
Unlike Claude and Richard, she had not been seriously burned; 
but Amerie was deeply concerned about damage to Madame's 
lungs, which could not readily be treated with the medications 
and equipment on hand. Also, the old woman refused to rest 
and was obstinately determined to participate personally in the 
next phase of her plan. The youthful appearance brought about 
by her rejuvenation had begun to fade away, and there were 
now deep furrows in her forehead and beside her thin mouth. 
Loss of facial substance had thrown her cheekbones and her 
beaklike nose into gaunt prominence. The golden torc rolled 
loosely about her thin, corded neck..Kawai said, "There remain with us in the camp some five 
hundred and fifty souls, most of them in good physical health 
in spite of their confused mental state. It is my opinion, as 
well as that of the three liberated physicians, that these people 
will recover once they embark on a course of positive action. 
We will begin dispersing the strongest within the next three 
days. They will travel with Homi and Axel and Philemon to 
the site of the Nancy iron workings. Others of our own people 
and some of the volunteers who remain will accompany this 
group with supplies. If all goes as planned, we will have at 
least the shell of a stockaded village erected within two weeks. 
Several smaller settlements will be built between here and Nancy 
as soon as Philemon and Axel can train the workers." 
Madame nodded. "Bien, entendu. But remember—produc-tion 
of the iron must be given priority! Let nothing be spared 
in the encouragement of those refugees who are willing to undertake this work. We must equip all 
of the Lowlives with 
iron weapons as soon as possible." 
They walked among the improvised huts toward a tributary 
of the Rhine, where the hospital tent had been set up. Many 
of the refugees came out of their shelters and stood in silence, 
watching Madame go by. She nodded to them and sometimes 
spoke a name, for almost all of these people had passed through 
the auberge during her tenure—and even those who were not 
known to her personally knew very well who she was. 
Some of them smiled. A number of faces displayed open 
hostility and one man spat and turned his back on her. But 
most watched with a spiritless torpor that made the old woman's 
heart shrink. 
"It was right, what we did!" She hurried along between 
Burke and Kawai, arms held stiff at her sides. "They had to 

be freed. They will become accustomed to it soon and then 
they will be content again." 
"Of course," said Chief Burke gently. 
Kawai said, "They are still profoundly shocked. We must 
make allowances for them. Later they will appreciate their 
release from bondage." 
"Many will continue to hate me, though." Her voice was 
toneless. "First for having sent them into slavery, and now for 
having freed them, casting them into fresh uncertainty. Their 
misery lies heavy upon my conscience. If I had not permitted 
them to pass through the time-portal, this tragedy would never 
have taken place."."They would have found another way to make themselves 
miserable," Burke said. "Look at me! The last of the shmo-hawks, 
for God's sake. No more Wallawallas after the Big 
Chief passes into the Happy Hunting Grounds—so I dramatize 
the damn shame of it by calling a press conference and telling 
the rotten paleskins, 'I will fight no more forever.' Not a dry 
eye on the Tri-D in a dozen Yankee planets as the noble Native 
American jurist makes his gesture. But later I got a note from 
the tribal council of the Yakimas telling me to get the hell back 
on the bench and quit being such a damn kvetch." 
Old Man Kawai said, "We have all of us been foolish, 
Angelique. But you are not to blame. Without your time-gate 
as an honorable exit, I would likely have taken my own life. 
That is perhaps true of many of us exiles. But I came here 
instead—and it is true that I endured much suffering at first, 
while I was a captive of the Tanu. But later, after my escape, 
I knew also a great joy. I have learned that there is happiness 
to be found in service to others. Without you, without your 
time-gate, I would have ended my days as selfishly as I lived 
most of them. I am still a fool, perhaps. But I am a fool who 
has known good friends and true peace." 
Madame's head lowered. "Nevertheless, I will not find my 
own peace until I atone in the way that I must. The slavery of 
the gray and silver torcs must be abolished. And the time-portal 
must be closed. We have made a beginning here at Finiah— 
but I will see it to completion or die!" 
She began to cough violently and her face went bluish white. 
"Goddam it!" muttered Burke. He scooped her up and went 
striding toward the shelter of the field hospital, a great tent 
made from dozens of durofilm tarps zipped together into a 
pavilion with screened sides. 
"Put me down, Peo! I am quite all right." She struggled in 
his arms. 
Kawai, trotting ahead, brought a swarthy man with tired 
eyes and a stethoscope held at the ready. "Put her on the plank 
table," the physician said. After examining the state of the old 
woman's lungs, the doctor said, "You don't take care of your-self, 
you're gonna drown in your own glop! Hear me? You 
been doing the drainage exercises Amerie prescribed?" 
"They are undignified." 
"Mashallah! Will you listen to the woman?" He scratched 
at an irritated ring of skin beneath his Adam's apple where the 
gray torc had been. "You guys—talk some sense into her!".He produced a minidoser and applied it to 
her jugular. 
"That will help some. But only rest will let your body get 
that fluid out of your lungs. Now are you going to behave?" 
Madame said, "Helas, Jafar cheri! There are matters that 
require my attention." Ignoring his protests, she got down from 
the table and toured the hospital, where most of the faces looked 
warmly upon her. One obviously pregnant woman, lying on a 

cot in the remnants of a splendid court costume, seized Ma-dame's 
hand and kissed it. 
"Thank God you freed us." The woman began to weep. 
"Twelve years. Twelve years of a living nightmare—and now 
it's over." 
Madame smiled and gently extricated her hand from the 
woman's grasp. "Yes, for you it is over, dear child. You are 
free." 
The woman hesitated. "Madame... what am I to do with 
it when it comes? There are other women, too, carrying their 
children. I am too close to delivery. But the others—" 
"You must make your own choices. The tenets of my own 
faith would counsel me to bear the child. It is, after all, in-nocent. 
After t h a t ... perhaps the wisest action is that followed 
by the Tanu themselves." 
The pregnant woman whispered, "I should give it back to 
them?" 
"The Firvulag will help you." Madame raised her eyes to 
the doctor. "You will see to it, if this is what she decides?" 
"I will." 
The old woman bent and kissed the forehead of the expectant 
mother. "I must now undertake a long journey. Perhaps you 
will pray for my ... safe arrival at my destination." 
"Oh, yes, Madame. And I'll tell the others." 
With a small gesture of farewell, the old woman turned 
away. The doctor followed her to the door of the tent where 
Kawai and Chief Burke waited. 
"They are now in your hands, Jafar cheri. You and Lucy 
and Lubutu must take care of them, since Amerie will go south 
with us." 
The physician wagged his head in dismay. "You're still 
determined to go?" He looked helplessly at Burke. "It's insan-ity." 
"I must carry out my plan," she insisted. "We leave early 
tomorrow morning. Only three weeks remain of the Truce and 
there is no time to waste.".Burke said, "If you won't consider your own welfare, think 
of the rest of us! Having to worry about you and take care of 
you. Amerie would probably act sensibly and stay in Hidden 
Springs if she didn't feel you needed her." 
Angelique Guderian looked up at the huge red man with 
affection. "You do not trap me with your forked tongue, mon 
petit sauvage. Now that Felice has returned from Finiah with 
her obedient herd of chalikos, we will ride south in comfort. 
As for Soeur Amerie, she has her own reasons for wishing to 
participate in the operation, as have the other volunteers. And 
so we march! Au 'voir, Jafar. We go now to the village to 
complete the last arrangements." She began walking toward 
the hospital door. 
The doctor called out, "Reconsider, Madame!" But she only 
laughed. 
Old Man Kawai shrugged as he started after her. "You have 
seen that it is useless to argue with her, Jafar. And perhaps, 
when you are as old as Peo Burke and I, you will understand 
why she thinks she must finish this affair herself." 
"Oh, I understand," said the doctor. "Only too well." 
He went back into the ward, where the expectant mother 
had begun to moan..5 
MARIALENA COOKED THE FAREWELL SUPPER HERSELF, LAYING 
places at Madame's table for the eleven who were going south, 
plus one for Kawai, who would take over as Freeleader in the 
morning. 
When all were seated, the Frenchwoman said, "The Rev-erend 

Sister will ask a blessing." 
Amerie said in a low voice, "Lord, bless this food. Bless 
this company. Bless this crazy undertaking." 
"Ameen," said Khalid Khan. 
The others, excepting Felice, said, "Amen." Then they 
heaped their plates and passed stoneware jugs of chilled wine. 
"I thought Pegleg was coming," Khalid said. 
Madame confessed, "I told him to meet us tomorrow before 
we set out. Perhaps you will think me a foolish old woman, 
mes enfants, but I judged it would be better to confer one last 
time tonight among ourselves. I know that Fitharn has seemed 
a faithful comrade during this perilous time. Nevertheless, we 
should not forget that his first loyalty is to his own Firvulag 
race. And I have never trusted the arriere-pensee of King Yeo-chee 
and Pallol One-Eye. There is always the chance that they 
plan to use us treacherously once we have succeeded in de-stroying 
the torc factory and closing the time-portal." 
Vanda-Jo, the plainspoken Public Works Chief, gave a cyn-ical 
hoot. "We'd be fools to let 'em know every card in our 
hand. If we bring this double-barreled blast off, the Firvulag 
will benefit. They don't need to know our planning details. All 
they have to do is help us with the traveling and hiding out." 
"Too bad outlaw humans aren't covered by the Truce," said 
the nun. She dropped a piece of meat to her little wildcat, 
which lurked under the table.."Fat chance," said Peo Burke. "Pass the burgundy—or 
whatever that is. My old wound needs anesthetizing." 
"Speaking of wounds," Amerie went on, "I realize it's use-less 
to urge Madame to stay behind. But Claude and Khalid 
are another matter. Claude's burns are just beginning to dry 
and a week isn't nearly enough recovery time for Khalid's 
concussion and arm and leg wounds." 
"You need me," the Pakistani said. "I'm the only one who's 
ever been to Muriah." 
"Ten years ago," the nun corrected him. "And via the Great 
South Road, not on the Rhone." 
"The capital can't have changed much in that time. Besides, 
I'm looking forward to the boat trip. Gert and Hansi used to 
kayak on the river back in the future." 
Hansi laughed grimly. "It should be a real pleasure cruise 
for invalids. But there's no escaping the fact that we need 
Khalid's knowledge of the city. Things will be tricky enough 
without getting lost." 
"This is true," said Madame. "I am distressed that you must 
go, Khalid, after you have already done so much, but your 
help might be crucial to our success... Claude, on the other 
hand, is merely being stubborn when he maintains his indis-pensability!" 
"I suppose you're the only one capable of pushing that amber 
message carrier through the time-warp!" the paleontologist 
snapped. "I'm fitter than you are, Angelique, and I've earned 
my place on this mission if anybody has." 
"Mulet polonais! Stay home and recover your health." Felice whacked her spoon handle on the table. 
"Now don't 
you two start that again! You're both a pair of sick old coots 
with no business out of your rocking chairs, and if we had any 
sense we'd lock you in a shed together and go off without you." "Fortunately," said Uwe 
Guldenzopf, taking a placid pull 
on his pipe, "we have no sense." 
Madame glared at Claude. "It is my duty to go! I, who 
sinned in opening the time-portal, must atone by closing it." 
"Hogwash," said Claude. "You've got a death wish, that's 
what." 

Madame flung down her knife. "Will you, of all people, 
impugn my motives? Look to your own death wish, Monsieur 
le Professeur!" 
Claude took a prim sip from his mug of wine. "Honi soil 
qui merde y pense, sweetheart."."Order, dammit!" Chief Burke pounded his huge fist on the 
table. "As Warlord in Chief of this flea-bitten crew, I declare 
that there will be no more discussion of motives! All of us have 
volunteered. All of us have proved that we can be useful in 
one way or another—either at Castle Gateway or down in 
Muriah at the torc-works caper... Now. I want to know whether 
there are any more serious questions before we wrap it up for 
the night." 
"I have thought of one thing," Basil said with some diffi-dence. 
"As a newcomer to the group, I've hesitated to suggest 
any major modification of Madame Guderian's original scheme. 
And until Felice returned yesterday morning with her golden 
torc and the chalikos and said she would go with us, the point 
was moot anyway. What I'm trying to say is—how about the 
Spear?" 
The others looked at the alpinist don with blank incompre-hension. 
Basil had been liberated in the fall of Finiah, having 
spent a month in the city dungeons following his recapture on 
the lake. His place in the new expedition had been assured 
when he declared himself willing to use his mountaineering 
skills in scaling the walls of Castle Gateway, the Coercer Head-quarters 
in Muriah, or any other fortress the group might care 
to invade. He was also, he admitted, "frightfully keen to teach 
the Tanu a lesson for having spoiled my Pliocene holiday." 
Old Man Kawai now shook his head in regret. "The Spear's 
powerpack is completely discharged, Basil. You couldn't get 
a glim out of a micro-LED with the juice that's left. I had a 
stab at trying to open the pack myself, but I simply could not 
improvise a suitable tool. It needs a craftier hand." 
"Still," Basil persisted, "if we could get the pack open, 
there's a good chance we could recharge it. Am I right?" 
The former electronics manufacturer lifted his skinny shoul-ders. 
"The flyer w as water-fusion powered. W hy n ot t he zap- p 
Felice said, "Jeez, guys, I'm not sure I can fine-tune my 
PK enough yet to break into the thing without ruining it." 
"That wasn't what I had in mind," said the alpinist. "What 
you could do is carry the Spear south much more easily than 
the rest of us could do. It would be priceless for the assault 
against the torc-making establishment." 
"He's right about that," Khalid agreed. "The factory is in 
the Coercer Guild Complex, locked up tighter than a Lylmik's 
virtue."."Lest we forget," Amerie interposed, "the Spear is dead." 
Basil said, "I have an idea who might resurrect it. Claude 
told me all about him one long hot afternoon weeks ago when 
we spent some time together in quod at Castle Gateway. Your 
talented little friend in the gold suit." 
"Aiken Drum!" said Felice. "Little tricky-pockets!" 
Claude's greenish eyes flashed. "He could! If anyone could 
decipher that antique photon weapon, Aiken could... But would 
he? They made him a silver, remember. He might have thrown 
in with them by now. He was always out for the main chance." 
"He was our friend," Amerie said. "He's a human being. 
He's got to help us against those monsters!" 
"Felice could twist his arm," Claude suggested, his smile 
bland. "Or isn't that your style any more, little girl?" 
The athlete ignored him. "Basil—I think your idea is a 
winner. We'll take the Spear, even if I have to shlep it on my 

back the whole thirteen hundred kloms down to Muriah. One 
way or another, we'll get Aiken Drum to make us a can opener." 
Chief Burke said, "We can hope for the best... Anything 
else?" 
Nobody said anything. Uwe tapped the dottle from his pipe 
into the empty bowl before him. "Marialena is always furious 
when I do this. But perhaps one last time?" 
"She'll forgive you," laughed Gert. 
Chairs scraped back. Everybody got up and stretched. Those 
with cottages in the village prepared to leave. The others would spread sleeping bags upon 
Madame's floor. 
Amerie laid a hand on Kawai's shoulder as the old man 
turned toward the door. "One favor, old friend." 
"Only name it, Amerie-san." 
The nun picked up the tiny pet wildcat. "If you could give 
a home to Deej—" 
He bowed gravely and took the little animal into his arms. 
"I will keep her safe for you until you return to Hidden Springs. 
And you will. I have made a most formidable vow to the 
Martyrs of Nagasaki." 
"Crazy old Buddhist," said the nun, pushing him out the 
door..6 
"THIS JUDGMENT THEY DEMAND OF ME CONCERNING YOU," 
Brede began. 
"Yes?" Elizabeth replied aloud, as always. 
"It must be made consonant with their own racial destiny 
here. I have foreseen my dear Tanu and Firvulag people united 
and operant. This is my vision as of the most ancient days, 
before we ever came to this galaxy, to this planet of the Many-Colored 
Land. This destiny will happen, even though my pro-lepsis 
fails in showing me the how and when... I would like 
to think that we have become friends, Elizabeth. I am deeply 
aware of your desire for noninvolvement in our affairs. But I 
cannot believe that you are an extraneous factor here! You are 
part of the pattern! And so are all of these others, your com-panions 
of Group Green, who have so gravely influenced Tanu 
and Firvulag and even the poor lost ones of the northern wil-derness. 
I can see the lines of destiny reaching toward a sure 
convergence at the Grand Combat in three weeks' time. I see 
it, I tell you! And your role... is strongly interwoven. But if 
not as racial genetrix—then what?" 
"Brede, I will not be used." Even with her mental screens 
firm, the determination behind Elizabeth's statement had an 
adamantine luster. 
"Then choose to help us," the exotic woman pleaded. "Your 
own human race, your own close friends, are bound up in this 
climax." 
"No judgment you make concerning me will satisfy all of 
the Tanu factions. You know that. Your High King wants his 
new dynasty. But the Host of Nontusvel won't be satisfied until 
I'm safely dead. As for my friends... they seem to be in better 
control of their own destinies than I am! Why won't you con-.sider strict justice for me for a 
change, rather than viewing me 
as a chess-piece in your proleptic game? Let me go free and 
harmless away from this place if that's what I choose." 
And I do. Soaring the world alone splendid at peace. "But—the pattern! I tell you, I see it! If it 
is not your genes that are to influence us, then there must be some other factor. 
O Sister of the Mind, help me to focus my faltering vision!" 
"Prescience was not a metafunction that was understood in 
my time. It was a wild talent. Unpredictable. The foreseeing 
was dangerous enough... but any attempted manipulation of 

future events foreseen was known to us to be futile. Whether 
I go free or not, your vision must come to pass. So let me go." 
Brede seemed not to have heard. They were sitting together 
in the limitless room without doors where the ambient atmo-sphere 
was enriched to the exotic's special need. But she had 
gone rigid and gasped in shallow exhalations while her features 
worked and her partly open mind showed a whirlpool of faces— human and Tanu and Firvulag and 
Howler—all gyrating and 
pulsing around Elizabeth's own image, and that generating 
filamentous probability lines forming and reforming in what 
was almost a Lissajous fabric of incoherence—unordered, ununified. 
"The psychounion!" Brede cried. "Not the genes—the men-tal 
Unity!" The mind of the Shipspouse brightened in such 
sweet hopefulness that even Elizabeth faltered in continuing to 
refuse empathy. 
"What—are you saying, Brede?" 
"That is your role! It doesn't matter when my people achieve their coalescence with the local 
Mind. It will happen. And 
when it does, I must be able to guide them into the orderly 
levels of metapsychic union that were the basis of the governing 
forces of your own Galactic Milieu, the reconciliation of di-vergent 
intellectual energies into an operant organic whole. 
You are to teach me how this is to be done! That is your role 
among us. You guided young children of your own time into 
the Unity. This was the focus of your life's work, as you have 
told me. In your Milieu, immature metafunctional minds were 
not left to flounder and make their own way. They were taught, 
led, enlightened. Show me how this was done. So that I will 
be ready. And then, if you still desire it, I will help you t o ... leave 
us." 
"You don't know what you're asking of me, Brede." 
"But this must be the solution! So elegant, so logical an.extension of the work I have already 
done for my dear ones. 
Consider them as they are now, in their disunity! My poor 
Firvulag, operant but weak and impotent, their psychic energies 
diffused into silly byways. Their kinsmen, the Howling Ones, 
festering in bitter despair. And will the Tanu be any different 
when they in turn achieve true operancy, delivered from their 
golden torcs? Your operant human race on the Elder Earth 
might well have perished if it had not been helped in its ex-tremity 
by other entities who were wiser. Help me to help my 
people. And then, when they are ready, I also will be ready." 
"You foresee this outcome?" Elizabeth inquired, dubious. Brede hesitated. Again the pained, 
gasping breaths. "I have— 
always been the guide and teacher of my people. Even in times 
when they were unaware. Whence shall the Unity come, if not 
from me? And where can I learn, if not from you?" 
"The difficulties would be enormous. Not only is your mind 
exotic and therefore unfamiliar to me, but you are also a mature 
psychic entity conditioned to the torc device over thousands of 
years. I have never worked with any but humans. Almost all 
of them were very young children, still flexible and able to 
absorb the training with a minimum of painful catalyst. I can 
only compare the process with a child's first acquisition of 
language. This is a process that seems nearly effortless to a 
baby; and yet when an adult attempts to learn new languages 
without using sophisticated ancillaries, he labors and suffers. 
The bringing of latent metafunctions to fully adept operancy is infinitely more difficult. First, 
you would have to become 
operant—and then make the much greater leap to adept status 

before absorbing the masterclass teaching techniques. There 
would be atrocious suffering." 
"I will endure whatever is necessary." 
"Even if you survive my education with your sanity intact, 
there is no guarantee that you will attain full operancy—much 
less the adept level. If your strength failed at any point, you 
would surely die. And then what would become of your peo-ple?" 
"I will not die," said Brede. 
"There are other... technical difficulties. The catalyst I spoke 
of. I can't think of an algetic source of sufficient intensity that 
would be available to us here in your room without doors." 
"Pain? Is this the only way that the psychic enlargement 
can be accomplished?" 
"The only sure way. There are others. In my own world,.latent humans have attained operancy when 
certain psycho-barriers 
were overcome through sublimation of the will to the 
cosmic Unity. But these other roads are uncertain—and in any 
case, I'm only qualified in the one technique. It has its roots 
in the preliterate cultures of my own era. The primitive people 
of Elder Earth were fully aware that pain, endured steadfastly 
and with dignified acceptance, acted as a psychic refining agent 
that opened the newly sensitized mind to wisdom otherwise 
inaccessible—as well as the individual spectrum of metafunc-tions." 
A panorama of pre-Milieu adepts flashed before Brede's 
mental eye. Elizabeth showed her monks and nuns and prophets 
and yogis, shamans and warriors and consecrated leaders, ab-original 
healers and seers from all of the wild places of pre-Intervention 
Earth—humans enduring self-imposed ordeals in 
the belief that they would emerge transfigured. 
Elizabeth said, "As we humans attained high technology, 
the creative use of suffering was nearly lost. Most high-tech 
civilizations are zealous in the eradication of pain, both physical 
and mental. Up until the time of the Intervention, very few of 
our intellectuals would have placed any value on it—this de-spite 
the teaching of earlier philosophers and the clear evidence 
to be gleaned from anthropology and even from developmental 
psychology itself." 
"My race was as yours in this respect," said Brede. "Un-derstand 
that I speak of my original home planet—not of these 
Tanu and Firvulag, who are different. The best of the dimorph-ics 
still celebrate life-passages with ordeals. The very Combat 
itself has roots therein." 
"But still perverted! Immature! Among the advanced human 
cultures of pre-Milieu times, we had comparable kinks. One 
form of physical suffering that was esteemed was that endured 
by athletes. Ritual game playing. Do you see the parallel? But 
our human race never valued any form of psychic pain. That 
attendant upon the normal education process was tolerated as 
a necessary evil—but there were constant attempts to amel-iorate 
it or eliminate it altogether. It never occurred to our 
primitive educators that suffering per se had a positive influence 
upon mental growth. A few religious groups did discover how 
pain worked as a tool for mental enlargement. My own church 
had a rather muddled concept of algetic offering that at least 
produced the proper endurance-discipline. But the faithful saw 
algetics only from the spiritual angle. When certain practition-.ers happened to levitate or read 
thoughts or perform other 
metapsychic functions, everybody was highly embarrassed." "Yes... yes." The great jeweled 
headdress nodded. Exotic 
reminiscences floated through Brede's mental vestibulum. "We 
of Lene also held to the belief that suffering was evil. And 

those who denied it were sadomasochists and hopelessly anom-alous. 
For example—these exiles! My dear foolish people. I 
have never, until now, completely understood my deep motives 
for adopting them and helping them to escape from our galaxy. 
But now it becomes obvious that my prolepsis recognized that 
tiny kernel of psychic validity in their aberrant mind-set. The 
Firvulag, especially, who endured the greatest rigors in their 
natural environment, were keenly appreciative of ordeals. And 
yet—they stalled in their mental evolution. As did the Tanu, 
seduced by their torcs, and most of the other people of our 
federation as well... As I have told you, all but the incom-patibles 
embraced the mind-amplifying device after the last of 
the wars." 
She paused, touching the gold at her own throat that was 
half-hidden behind the lowered respirator. "And this torc, which 
seemed such a boon, resulted in a dead end for the Mind of 
an entire galaxy. Unless ... the evolution continues here. And 
it must! But, Almighty Tana, why is my vision so dim?" 
Elizabeth said, "The time-dimension may be much greater 
than you ever suspected. Our Milieu perceived the past manifest 
in the present, the present manifest in the future." 
"Elizabeth!" Brede's voice caught. "Six million years? Ah, 
no!" 
"We had legends. And there is the compatibility." 
"And the Ship," Brede whispered. "I told my dearest one 
to choose the best." 
She raised her glittering mask. Tears fell onto its red metallic 
smoothness, losing themselves in the crystal ornamentation. 
The women sat silent for a long time. Between them on the 
table rested the exquisite glass model of the interstellar orga-nism 
that had been Brede's mate. Together the disparate spouses 
had shared a kind of psychounion that, inadequate as it was, 
had partaken in a small measure of the true mental conjugation 
Elizabeth had known among her own kind. But Brede's Ship 
was dead. And she—like Elizabeth—was alone. 
"Whatever the risks," came the amplified voice from the 
hidden mouth, "you must teach me. I know that the Mind of 
my people will mature, just as I know that the destinies of.Tanu and Firvulag and humanity are 
interleaved. Perhaps the 
Unity of my people will perfect itself soon and perhaps late. 
But there must be a teacher. And if not me, then you." 
Elizabeth flared in anger. "Oh, no you don't! Damn you! 
Can't you understand the way it is with me? I don't want to 
sacrifice myself for your people. Not even for my own people! 
Can't you accept that operancy doesn't equate with sainthood?" 
"There have been saints among you." 
The person behind the mask seemed to melt, to change. 
Elizabeth stiffened, shocked by the metaphoric thrust that she 
instantly repudiated. 
"No! You can't trick me that way. You're no saint and 
neither am I! I'm an ordinary woman with ordinary flaws. I 
once was able to do unusual work because my natural talents 
were trained up for it. But there was never any ... consecration. 
When I seemed to lose my abilities, I didn't offer up the loss 
and make the best of it. I chose this Exile route. I'm a flyaway 
and glad of it! My being trapped here in the Pliocene, separated 
forever from the Unity, with my metafunctions restored and 
monsters nipping at my heels, is a cosmic joke. And you are, 
too, whoever you are! And I still want my balloon back!" 
And that is enough for you loving none loved by none 0 
highflyingfleeing Elizabeth? 

"I loved once and suffered the loss. Once was enough. Love 
costs too much. I won't be a mother to your people. Not 
physically and not mentally." 
Brede's mind and mask mirrored only Elizabeth. 
Bitter mind-laughter underlay the vocal speech of the human 
woman. "Oh, that's clever of you, Two-Face! But the ploy 
won't work. I know all about my sin of Olympian selfishness. 
But you can't prove that my duty lies with your people, or 
with exiled humanity, or with any hypothetical merging of the 
races." 
Brede raised her hands. The mask came down and there 
was only the sad, patient smile. "Then help me to fulfill my 
duty, which does lie with them all. Teach me." 
"We—we don't have a pain source of sufficient intensity." 
"We do." Brede's determination was unshakable. "There is 
hyperspatial translation. My body can be sustained in the su-perficies 
of the continuum for as long as necessary. I have the 
legacy of competence from my Spouse. I require no mechanism 
whatever to span the width of this galaxy. I have never con-sidered 
using the translational power before this, simply be-.cause there was no question of deserting my 
people. And of 
course I would not actually leave them now. I would return." 
"If the attempt at mental enlargement doesn't kill you." 
"I am willing to risk all, to suffer all." 
Elizabeth exclaimed, "How can you love these wretched 
barbarians so much when they can never appreciate what you 
do for them?" 
Only the smile, and the invitation to enter the mind. 
With great reluctance, Elizabeth said, "There's another thing 
I haven't touched on. The teacher... shares the ordeal." 
O Elizabeth. No I did not realize. I have been presumptuous 
and you must forgive. I see now that I have no right— 
Elizabeth broke into the protesting thought with brusque 
words. "Brede, I'm going to die. Even if I fly out of here, 
your dearly beloved people are going to track me down sooner 
or later and finish me off. And so... why not? Perhaps, if I 
succeed with you, it would be a kind of epitaph. If you're 
willing to chance the ordeal, I'll take you. You'll be my last 
student. And if your vision of joint racial destiny is fulfilled, 
perhaps you can even be my justification." 
"I never intended to cause you more pain. And I commis-erate." 
"Well—don't waste it." Elizabeth's tone was wry. "Every 
bit of suffering is valuable!... Are you sure you can work the 
translation?" 
Brede's mind showed her. Elizabeth would not physically 
accompany the exotic traveler, of course. But her mind would 
remain meshed with Brede's to channelize the neural fires. 
"Whenever you are ready," the Shipspouse said, "we can 
go forth." 
The ceiling of the room without doors opened. There toward 
the south was the milky river of the Galactic Plane. And behind 
its dust clouds, the Hub; hidden beyond that lay the other arm 
of the spiral, almost a hundred thousand light-years distant. 
"All the way across," said Elizabeth. "Now." 
... And there they were, in an instant and forever, stretched 
on a rack the width of the starry whirlpool, poised between 
gray limbo and black, distorted, spangled space. The atoms of 
Brede's physical body had become more tenuous than the rare 
atomic fog that floats in the void between the stars and vibrates 
still with the birth cry of the universe. The mind of the Ship-.spouse shrieked on the same 
frequencies as the agonized par-ticles. 

And in this manner, the enlargement began. 
It would be all the more difficult because Brede's latent powers were so great. All of the wellworn 
psychoenergetic 
circuits leading from the torc would have to be rerouted through 
the syncytial mazes of the right cortex, reeducated to operancy 
within the refining flame of the ultimate pain that the universe 
could inflict upon a thinking, feeling creature. By enduring, 
Brede might pass in a short time through a process that ordi- narily took many years. But the pain 
in itself was worthless 
unless discipline could be maintained and the divarication of 
the mental network kept firmly under control. This was where 
the guidance of a skilled teacher was all-important. While Eliz-abeth's 
great redactive power clamped around the pulsating 
psyche and kept it from disintegrating, she also directed Brede's 
flaring limbics as though they were countless metapsychic 
torches burning away the accumulated cortical debris of a life- time 14,000 years in length. 
The mind of the operant, steadfast in the mutual anguish, 
led and braced that of the aspirant. The two of them hung 
locked together in the inferno between true space and hyper-space, 
where there is but a single dimension, an afferent input 
that sentient beings of all races apprehend only as pain... 
The process went on and on, simultaneous and eternal ac-cording 
to their shared subjective consciousness. Brede knew 
in her agony that changes were taking place within her soul— 
but she could not rise above the fire long enough to study 
herself. She could only accept and affirm and continue to be 
strong, hoping that when the suffering was done her mind would 
still live in the physical universe. 
The pain lessened. 
Now Brede felt Elizabeth's binding energies soften to gentleness. She became aware of other lifeforces 
besides their 
own two, appearing to sing amidst the diminishing flame. How 
odd! And what was that? There, so far away, beyond the gray 
and the black and the humming megatonal song and the rack 
of invisible waning fire was a glimpse of brightness that might 
have been approaching; and the clearer her perception of it, 
the more irresistible it became. Brede abandoned discipline, 
forgot all self in her sudden eagerness to reach it, to see and 
join with it, now that she was capable of the Unity ... 
Return. 
O no Elizabeth not now let me go on—.We have reached the limit. Return with me. 
No no we exiles together continue on with me to the end 
of it and join beyond pain where it waits for us loving... 
We must return. I'm going to draw you back. Don't resist. 
No no no no— 
Let go. Stop looking. You may not have that and live. Come 
back now from there submit to my redaction fly back across 
the expanse don't struggle Sancta Illusio Persona Adamantis 
ora pro nobis wherever you are submit Brede submit to my 
guidance rest in me we are almost there... there. .. 
The Shipspouse sat unmasked across the table from Eliza-beth. 
"Gone. It's gone. You took me away from it." 
"It was necessary for both of us. And the culmination of 
the pain in your ordeal. Which was successful." 
Tears steamed down Brede's face. There was a slow rekin-dling 
after near-extinguishment, and regret that would be a part 
of her until, at last, she died. In the silence of the room without 
doors Brede recovered. 
There was an opening and an invitation. Brede ventured in, 
then cried aloud as she knew the first true Union with a mind 
of Earth. 

So that is—how it is. 
Yes. I embrace thee Sister. 
The exotic woman put fingertips to the lifeless gold at her 
throat and unfastened the catch. She held the open torc at arm's length for a moment before laying 
it on the table beside the 
Ship's likeness. 
I live. I function freely feeble an infant tottering on first 
legs but the metafunctions are released and such richness and 
the Unity is twoinone now but later when I know the loved 
Mind— 
There will be spontaneous growth with joy instead of pain 
until you are filled to capacity. This last is subject to the lim-itations 
of your physical body as well as the state of the local 
Mind. Since you already love the Mind, you will be able to 
pour forth without diminishing. This is something I cannot do. 
And that which I saw— 
What most of us operant or no shall see and possess ulti-mately. 
Not many aspirants catch a glimpse of it. Fortunately. 
Once more the two women sat in mental silence. 
"There is no memory of anguish," Brede finally said out 
loud. "But I can see that there would not be. The guiding and.the acceptance are all-important in 
differentiating unproductive 
misery from creative purgation. And after that comes joy. Yes— 
that, too, is what one would expect. Not mere absence of pain, 
but ecstasy." 
"Almost all mature humans are aware of the thin line di-viding 
the two—even if they can't understand what to make 
of it. If you wish, as part of your further education, I'll share 
some concepts of the Milieu essence that our philosophers and 
theologians debated." 
"Yes. You must show me all that you can. Before you— 
go." Elizabeth refused the gambit. "The psychology of each sen-tient 
race savors the theosphere in a unique way. We might 
study the possible niche that your people might occupy. And 
now that there are two of us, we can do what no single operant 
mind can do—partake together of the essence in a limited 
fashion. It will be dilute because the Mind of the Pliocene is 
still so infantile, but you'll find it wonderful." 
"It is already wonderful," said Brede. "But the first thing I 
must do with my enriched newness is look once again along 
the lines of probability in search of the all-important pattern 
that was unclear. Will you join me?" 
The teacher and sister vanished. Mental doors slammed. "I 
might have known! Brede, you're an incredible fool." 
The exotic woman's mind was fully open but Elizabeth 
would not go in, would not look. 
"I'm leaving your rooms without doors," Elizabeth said. 
"I'm going to find your King and tell him your judgment con-cerning 
my fate. Your new judgment. And I'm going to find 
the balloon, and in my own sweet time I'm going to leave this 
place." 
Brede bowed her head. "I will give you your balloon. And 
if you wish, I will deal with the Host of Nontusvel. Please— 
let me go with you to the King." 
"Very well." 
The two of them went out and stood again briefly on the 
promontory above the White Silver Plain. The salt was crowded 
with miniature lights. As the time for the Grand Combat ap-proached, 
the tent-city of the Firvulag grew. Even though it was 
the middle of the night, supply caravans flanked by rama link-men 
could be farsensed as they crept down the slope south of 

the city toward the temporary encampment. Landing stages at.the shore of the lagoon were 
illuminated and there were lights 
on the water as well. 
Brede studied the scene, masked and inscrutable. "Only 
three weeks until the Grand Combat, and then it will be re-solved." 
"Three weeks," Elizabeth repeated, "and six million years.".7 
AT THE TIME OF THE GRAND COMBAT TRUCE, ALL ROADS IN 
the northern regions of the Many-Colored Land led to Roniah. 
Through this city passed Tanu and Firvulag alike on their way 
to the games—the Great Ones of both exotic races traveling 
via riverboat while the humbler majority followed the Great 
South Road that paralleled the west bank of the Rhone all the 
way down to Lac Provencal and la Glissade Formidable. 
Most of the travelers from northern regions broke their jour-ney 
at the Roniah Fair. There the ancient enemies mingled 
freely in a once-a-year orgy of commerce that extended through 
the middle two weeks of the pre-Combat Truce, day and night 
without a letup. Booths were set up along the great pillared 
midway and among the surrounding exterior gardens of the 
river city. The peripheral area became a huge campground 
where human and Firvulag entrepreneurs presided over tented 
caravanserais and dining establishments catering to the tourists. 
This year it was the Finiah refugees, well supplied with 
money but almost completely bereft of possessions, who were 
the most eager customers at the Fair. To bolster their spirits 
they spent lavishly for the luxury goods that were the stock-intrade 
of Firvulag crafters: polished gems and amber, jewelry, 
novelties carved of ivory or semiprecious stone, gold and silver 
gewgaws, begemmed headdresses and garment trims, fancy 
tack for chalikos, ornate belts and scabbards and battleharness, 
perfumes and unguents and scented soaps derived from wild-flowers 
and herbs, peculiar liqueurs, psychoactive flycap and 
panaeolus fungi, and delicatessen such as wild honey, candies 
with alcoholic syrup centers, truffles, garlic, spices, gourmet 
sausages, and that paramount exotic delectable—wild straw-berry 
preserves. More-staple goods were purveyed by human.vendors from Roniah and the other Tanu 
settlements: fine tex-tiles 
and ready made garments, dyestuffs and other domestic 
chemicals, glass tools of every description, glass tableware and 
containers, glass armor, and glass weapons. From the Tanu 
plantations flowed quantities of beer, wine, and spirits pack-aged 
in wooden casks or leather bottles, smoked and preserved 
meats, dried and pickled fruits and vegetables, and a wide 
variety of nonperishable cereal products such as flour, groats, 
and plain and flavored hardbreads. The food was not only sold 
to the travelers, but was also sent down the river to aid in the 
provisioning of the Grand Combat itself. 
Late on October fourteenth a certain refugee party came 
riding down the crowded highroad and arrived at the Roniah 
Fair. It made its way into the private campground area where 
petty Tanu and Firvulag nobility could erect their own pavilions 
separate from the commonalty. The group of travelers was 
unique only in that it consisted entirely of humans. There were 
two gold-torc ladies who might have been mother and daughter— 
the elder wearing flowing emerald gauze robes and an outra-geous 
jeweled chapeau, the younger in full blue coercer's armor 
and a golden cloak, bearing a lance from which floated a banner 
of gold with a raven displayed sable. The ladies' entourage 
consisted of five bronze-armored soldiers led by a captal of 
gigantic stature, an elderly steward, two handmaids, and a 
gnarled little one-legged wrangler, in whose presence the pack-chalikos 

and remounts seemed unaccountably skittish. 
"Yes—we lost everything in the Finiah disaster," the gran-dam 
told the sympathetic human campmaster as they signed 
in. "All save a few treasures and these faithful gray-torc serv-ants 
are gone, leaving my daughter and me sadly destitute. 
Still... there is the possibility that we may recoup our fortunes 
at the Combat, for the Lady Phyllis-Morigel has trained dili-gently 
and shows great promise as a warriormaid, and so we 
may gain both riches and revenge at the White Silver Plain, if 
Tana wills." 
The campmaster saluted respectfully. The lovely young face 
of the Lady Phyllis-Morigel smiled at him beneath the raised 
visor of her helmet. "Good fortune will surely attend you in 
the lists, Lady. I can feel your mighty coercive power even 
though you've got it leashed back." 
"Phyllis, dear," the old woman chided. "For shame." 
The girl blinked and the wave of coercion receded. "Your.pardon, Worthy Campmaster. I didn't mean 
to press you. This 
will be my first Combat and I'm overexcited." 
"Small wonder," said the man. "But don't you worry, little 
Lady. Just keep cool and you'll come out a sure winner in the 
prelims. I've got a feeling about you." 
"You're kind to say so, Campmaster. I feel that I've been 
waiting all my life to participate in the games..." 
"Ladies, it's late," interrupted the old steward, who had 
been fidgeting in the saddle during the chitchat. "You must 
rest." 
"Master Claudius is right," said the huge captal of the guard. 
"Tell us our allotted space, Campmaster, so that we can rest 
our bones. We've been on the trail six days and we're worn 
out." 
"Six days," tsk'd the campmaster. "Then you weren't with 
the refugee group that was sheltered at Castle Gateway?" 
Hastily, the captal said, "We were too late to join the train 
led by Lord Velteyn. There is great confusion still in the north-land." 
The campmaster studied a board-map. "Most of your fellow 
citizens from Finiah who are still here are camped in the river-front 
spaces, which are the most attractive sites that we have. 
I can place you down there for only a slight surcharge—" 
The old woman was firm. "Much as we would like to join 
our compatriots, it is necessary that we economize so that we 
will not run short of funds at the Combat itself. Furthermore, 
we should be embarrassed among our friends because we are 
unable to reciprocate any entertainment they might offer us. 
Therefore, good Campmaster, indicate to us a modest place 
sufficient for our two tents and the picketing of our animals. 
One would prefer high ground, if this is available." 
Slightly disappointed, the man re-studied his board. "Well, 
there's Number 478 on the northern edge of Section E. High 
and breezy—but you'll have to carry water." 
"It will do splendidly. My noble daughter will bring us water 
by virtue of her psychokinetic power. The fee? Ah. Ca y est. 
And now we bid you good night." 
The man took the coins and threw a shrewd glance at the 
warriormaid. "So you have PK, too—eh, Lady Phyllis? Now 
I'm positive you'll do well in the lists! I'll watch for you and 
risk a few bob. As a rookie, you should get nice long-shot 
odds. Yes, indeed!" He waved a cordial farewell as the party.rode down the lamp-bordered lane into 
the hurly-burly of the 
crowded campground. 
"You dummy, Felice," said Chief Burke. "What's the idea letting loose your coercion? Now that 

man's going to remember 
you." 
She gave a light laugh. "He'd remember us anyway, Peo. 
At least now he knows I'm a genuine gold. You should have 
seen your face when that guy suggested we camp next to the 
Finiah crowd!" 
"This is, our worst danger," Madame said. "Felice and I 
may easily delude any torced persons by pretending to be half-deranged 
with grief because of our misfortunes. But the rest 
of you, with your sundered gray torcs, are sure to be detected 
as interlopers if Tanu or torc-wearing humans attempt to com-municate 
with you mentally. You must stay close to Felice and 
me at all times so that we may intercept and turn aside any 
telepathic importunities. The purchase of supplies and forage 
must be undertaken tonight by Fitharn. Unless he is deliberately 
probed by a powerful metapractitioner, he will be above sus-picion." 
"I still think it's risky camping in here," said Vanda-Jo. 
"We've been over that," Burke said, 'This far south, it 
would be suspicious if we tried to camp anywhere else." 
"No more Firvulag tumuli to shelter in down here, missy," 
Fitharn said. "The Little Folk in these parts don't dare have 
large settlements, the way we do up north. Only single-family 
burrows for the most part, well-hidden in the wildest regions 
far from the trails. Folks around here are leery of strangers— 
even ones that come recommended by King Yeochee." "We have already had hints," remarked Madame 
with some 
tartness, "that the royal authority becomes exiguous in the 
hinterlands." 
Fitharn grinned. "Our King's sovereignty is a little less 
formal than old Thagdal's. We've an elected monarchy, you 
know. But we Firvulag are loyal in our fashion. And unlike 
some other people I could mention, we'd never stoop to using 
a deposed ruler as a life-offering." 
The party came into a region where the tents and campfires 
were more widely spaced. There were large rock outcroppings 
and fewer trees and the lamp-bordered trail led increasingly uphill. That they traversed the lowrent 
district was obvious 
from the small number of chalikos and hellads that were pegged 
out among the campsites. The shelters were mostly black Fir-.vulag tents or the motley lodgings of 
elderly Tanu bachelors. 
Unlike the noisy conviviality of the central area, this part of 
the campground was somnolent except for the calling of insects 
and snorts and grumbles from domestic animals. 
Fitharn said, "Here's 478. Nice and secluded." He, of course, 
could see in the dark better than the humans could see by 
daylight. Hopping easily on his pegleg, he went up the rocks 
that hemmed the space on three sides and ascertained that the 
adjoining sites were empty. "Our closest neighbors are Fir-vulag, 
Madame. Looks like a perfect spot. I'll hobble the beasts 
for unloading and take a pair of remounts to the Fair for supplies 
right away." 
Felice swung down from the saddle of her tall steed. "And 
I'll set up the tents." She came over to Amerie's mount and 
smiled up at the nun, who, like Vanda-Jo, was disguised in 
the blue-and-yellow-striped robes of a gray-torc serving woman. 
"Still feeling creaky? Let me help you." 
Amerie was levitated out of the saddle and floated gently 
to earth. 
"You're learning how, all right," the nun observed. 
"Oh, yes. By the time we reach Muriah, I should have it 
pretty well figured out." 

"How about Madame and me?" Vanda-Jo was letting her irritation show. "And poor old Claude and 
Khalid could use a 
leg down, too." 
The athlete bent her psychokinetic power to the unseating 
of the others. Then, as Peo and Basil and Gert and Hansi 
unloaded the pack-animals, the girl erected the two Tanu-style 
tents, with their telescoping poles and guy-lines, simply by 
putting her mind to it. Another mental exercise brought waters 
streaming through the air from the Rhone, which lay nearly 
half a kilometer away, into three large decamole tubs that the 
men had set inflated and ready. An entire deadwood tree, plucked 
from the cliffs behind the camp, came sailing down and landed 
without a sound at the edge of the site. 
"Now comes the dicey part," Felice said, concentrating. 
"My creativity isn't under control yet, so everybody stand back 
while I blast the tree into firewood. I hope! If I bobble it, we'll 
end up with charcoal or ashes, so cross your fingers." 
Zap. 
"Oh, well done," said Basil. "Split her right down the mid-dle. 
Now off with the branches, my dear." Zap zap zap. Pammedy-pow-pow-pow.."Slice 'er like bratwurst!" 
Uwe urged. The girl's small-scale 
mental lightning flared again and again, cutting the tree into 
convenient billets. When the pile of wood lay there, steaming 
gently, most of the party applauded. 
Madame said, "One can perceive that your three primary 
metafunctions are developing to a formidable degree, ma petite. 
You will exercise prudence, will you not?" 
"Haven't I behaved myself on the trip from Hidden Springs?" 
Felice inquired reproachfully. "Don't worry. I won't go wan-dering 
away to show off. I want to see these Tanu bastards 
screwed just as much as you do, Madame. I won't jeopardize 
the plan." 
The old woman looked exhausted, but she said with deter-mination, 
"C'est bien. Then let us have a small council of war 
before our good friend Fitharn returns. The time has come for 
important decision making." 
"We can gather round the campfire," said Felice. 
A dozen stool-sized rocks came flying through the darkness 
and formed a circle. Pieces of wood arranged themselves into 
a cone and ignited when a glowing ball of psychoenergy ma-terialized 
beneath them. Within perhaps ten seconds, the fire 
was ablaze. The conspirators sat down on the rock seats and 
began divesting themselves of armor and other superfluous 
gear. 
"We have arrived," Madame said, "at a critical point in our 
enterprise. The usefulness of Fitharn and his Firvulag confreres 
is virtually at an end, since they will not violate the Truce by 
participating directly in any attack upon the Tanu. We, of 
course, have no such scruples. We Lowlives are ever outlaws, 
protected by no Truce. We know what we may expect if we 
should be captured. Nevertheless, the exotic enemy will not 
expect us to strike again so soon after Finiah. Tanu intelligence 
is doubtless aware that most of our irregulars have dispersed. 
They will expect us to consolidate our position in the north— 
which we are doing, of course—but they can scarcely dream 
that we would be so bold as to move against them in the south, 
on their own home ground." 
Chief Burke said, "The presence of Tanu refugees has worked 
in our favor. There are so many ill-equipped exotics on the 
road that our group, dressed in the stuff Felice liberated at 
Finiah, attracts no particular attention." 

"Things have progressed smoothly thus far," Madame agreed. 
"But now begins the most dangerous part of the operation. The.new moon is on the twentieth, six 
days from now. This is also 
the last day of the Roniah Fair, after which there will be an 
emptying of this campground as the exotic people hurry on to 
the White Silver Plain. It is my belief that the torc factory 
strike-force should embark at once for Muriah via riverboat. It is possible to make the trip in 
less than four days—perhaps 
only three—if a skilled skipper is obtained and one can conjure 
up psychokinetic winds." 
"We'll find us a good boatman," said Felice, peeling off 
her sapphire shell. "And he'll do exactly as we say, once Khalid 
puts the chisel to his gray torc." 
"You're sure you'd rather not try to mind-bend him?" the 
metalsmith asked Felice. 
"I'm still too clumsy to work through the torcs. If he fought 
me, I could accidentally kill him. Don't worry—I'll be able 
to tame him barenecked." 
Madame continued. "We may hope that you will arrive in 
Muriah around the dark of the moon, obtain the assistance of 
Aiken Drum if possible, and mount your attack at a suitable 
time. Let us say, early on the twenty-second. In the small hours 
of the morning. And at dawn, I myself will put the message 
through the time-portal." 
There was an uncomfortable silence. 
"So you're still determined to make the grand gesture," 
Claude said. 
The firelight showed Madame's face tightened into its most obstinate expression. "We have been 
over this. There are only 
two of us capable of approaching the time-gate under the cloak 
of invisibility—and Felice would be wasted in the Castle Gate-way 
operation. Her great talents can best be used in the southern 
thrust, while my more meager ones are quite adequate for the 
castle action." "You'll have to wait around here for a week," Claude said. 
"What if you come down with another pneumonia attack?" 
"Amerie has given me medicines." 
"So you'll just stroll up to the time-gate and toss the amber 
inside!" 
"Au juste." 
"Velteyn is still at Castle Gateway coping with his refu-gees," 
Chief Burke warned. "He may not go south until the 
last minute. We know that he has no difficulty seeing through 
your illusions. You may be able to approach the gate without 
being detected—but I doubt that your creative metafunction.would be able to operate within the 
taufield itself. Once you 
throw the message carrier inside, it will become visible to the 
guardians and soldiers standing nearby. They'll sound the 
alarm." 
Claude added, "And Velteyn or some other high-powered 
Tanu will come running and melt your personal invisibility 
screen like the snows of yesteryear." 
"I will have accomplished my task," the old woman said. 
"And died!" Claude exploded. "But it's not necessary, 
Angelique! I've thought of another way." And he told them. 
Uwe nodded his bearded head. "That just might march, 
Claude. You should be able to do the necessary work without 
difficulty, and it would solve the problem of finding a place 
for Madame to hide out as well. And you'd be a backup for 
her in case—" 
Claude broke in. "You guys don't need me down south. I'd 
be a nuisance—I admit it. But up here, I can be an asset." 

"We know your motives, all right," Felice said. "Chivalrous 
old poop." 
Madame glanced around the circle, then made a small ges- ture of resignation. "We will revise the 
castle action as Claude 
has recommended, then. At dawn on the twenty-second, when 
we two make our attempt against the time-gate, the rest of you 
will already have accomplished the assault on the torc factory." 
"Sit deus nobis," muttered the nun. 
Chief Burke said, "Our iron will be a secret weapon in any 
hand-to-hand fighting with the Tanu, but it will have no special 
advantage over human enemies—especially gold-torcs. We 
have only two weapons with really large destructive potential 
for the blasting of the Coercer Guild stronghold. There's Fel-ice's 
psychozap—which may or may not be powerful enough 
to do the job—and the Spear." 
"Which is nothing but a pretty glass clothespole," Khalid 
reminded them, "unless we get Aiken Drum to help us recharge 
i t ... How about it, Felice? Do you think your energy projection 
will build up strong enough to break down thick masonry and 
bronze doors?" 
"As of now, I doubt it," the girl said. "I get better every 
day, but we'd damn well better not plan on that kind of attack. 
But, listen—as I understand it, our primary target isn't the 
whole headquarters building but just the factory part. Wouldn't 
those torc components be delicate little gadgets? Could be, all 
we'll have to do is bring the roof down on 'em and it's bye-.bye, baby! Vanda-Jo could tell by 
looking at the building just 
what spots I'd have to hit. Right?" 
"I might be able to," said the Public Works Chief, but her 
tone betrayed doubt. 
"I've seen that place," Khalid said. "It doesn't look anything 
like the fairytale towers of Finiah did. It's a bloody great cube 
of marble and bronze about as vulnerable as the Polity Bank 
in Zurich! Unless Felice checks out as a mountain mover by 
next week, she's going to find it a helluva tough zap." 
The little athlete had removed almost all of her glass armor 
and its padding and sat on her rock attired only in a white 
chemise and a pair of sollerets with golden spurs. She swung 
her blue-shod feet. Reflections from the gemmed plates of the 
footgear danced over her delicate face. "I don't know what I'll 
be capable of next week. But whatever I've got, I'll lay all 
over those Tanu friggers." 
"You will follow Peo's orders, child," Madame said sharply. 
"Oh, yes." Felice's eyes were wide. 
Basil said, "Whatever Felice's eventual firepower, our best 
chance of success still lies in the photon weapon. If we can 
recharge the Spear, we might even demolish the Coercer Guild 
complex from a distance with a minimum of hazard to our 
party. We could do it from out in the lagoon, couldn't we, 
Khalid?" 
"The building is on the northern edge of the city, west of 
the place where the main rollerway comes up from the docks. 
One wall of the keep structure is flush with the escarpment. 
There's a sheer drop of maybe a hundred meters on that side 
of the peninsula, then a klom or so of dunes and carved-up 
sediments before the shore of the Catalan Gulf... What do you 
think, Claude? You fired the damn thing." 
The paleontologist said, "With a steady platform for the 
shot, you could zap the building to kingdom come. Or even 
shoot the cliff out from under it." 
Amerie's voice was low. "If we do it in the wee hours of 

the morning, perhaps the casualties will be minimal." 
"Getting cold feet, Sister?" the big Native American in-quired. 
"This is war. If you're squeamish, you'd better stay 
with Madame and Claude." 
The old woman's face was troubled. "It might be best, ma 
Soeur." 
"No!" said Felice. "You agreed to help where you were 
needed most, Amerie. And that's with us. We can't risk another.stupid disaster like Peo's pig 
screwing up the assault. This 
time, the doctor goes along." 
"I'll do my best," the nun insisted. "I told you that I would. 
Just settle on a plan and I'll follow it." 
"Let me suggest," Basil said, "that we rethink the role of 
Aiken Drum. Is it really necessary for us to wait until we reach 
Muriah before contacting him to enlist his help?" 
The rest of them looked at the climber, not understanding. 
"We might try to farspeak him from here," Basil explained. 
"Let the young man know we're coming. Insure that he's there 
waiting for us. Perhaps even present the problem of the Spear 
to him so that he can be thinking about it in advance of our 
arrival." Madame began to protest, but Basil held up a tactful 
hand. "I know that Madame Guderian has doubts about her 
ability to farspeak over great distances—as well as farspeaking 
on the intimate mode. But it's occurred to me that we might 
utilize your other friend, Elizabeth, in a telepathic relay." 
"Say!" Claude exclaimed. 
"You did tell us, Madame, that you perceived Elizabeth's 
farspeech shortly after Group Green arrived in the Pliocene. 
Surely by now the woman's faculties must have recuperated 
to the extent that she could receive your own transmission on— 
er—tight beam, even if it were a bit wavery, so to speak." 
Madame said, "I doubt that I have the competence. Eliza-beth's 
thought flickered past me in an instant. I did not—how 
shall I say it?—store the data of her mental signature." 
Felice jumped to her feet. "I could help you, Madame! We 
wouldn't have to farspeak Elizabeth on the intimate mode to 
get her attention. A simple shout at top volume on the human 
command mode would do it. All Elizabeth needs to know is 
that we're out here hollering. Her seekersense could surely zero 
in on us and then pick up Madame's weakie-squeakie on the 
very narrow focus." 
The old woman frowned at the eager girl. "Other minds 
might be equally capable of tracking down the source of our 
telepathic loudhail." 
"Not if we handle it my way! Felice exulted. "What we 
do—early tomorrow we synchronize timepieces and I go ten 
or twenty kloms back up the North Road. Then we simulcast 
at predetermined intervals! If we farspeak that way, the Tanu 
can't possibly get an accurate fix on the double shout. But an 
operant like Elizabeth shouldn't have any trouble sorting the.mental patterns of the two of us and 
tracking Madame when she throttles back to the intimate mode." "It could work," Amerie said. 
Chief Burke growled, "None of this makes much sense to 
a poor old redskin shyster like me. But let's try it." 
"It sounds medium crafty," Khalid said, "provided Felice 
and Madame can mesh brains... and provided this Aiken Drum can be trusted with our precious 
petards." 
"You're crazy if you tell him the whole plan," Claude said. "Why must you always be so cynical, 
Claude?" Amerie 
complained. 
The old man sighed. "Maybe because I've lived so long. 
Maybe I've lived so long because." "Claude," Madame asked, "would you trust Elizabeth's 

judgment in this matter?" 
"Absolutely." "Then it is simple. Tonight we rest, tomorrow we attempt 
the communication. If we make contact, we will request Eliz- abeth's own assessment of the 
character of Aiken Drum and 
proceed as she advises. D'accord?" 
Her dark glance flashed around the circle. The other ten members of the expedition nodded. 
'That's settled," said Chief Burke. "You leave at dawn, 
Felice, and we'll schedule the big broadcast for noon. You dress up in your armor and all and take 
Basil and Uwe and 
Khalid as your gray-torc escort. Any Tanu get nosy, you're just looking for your Uncle Max among 
the refugees. While 
you're putting some distance between us, Madame and the rest 
of us odds and sods can go down to the Roniah wharf and scout out a suitable boat. Gert and Hansi 
know the kind of vessel we'll need." 
"Don't be late getting back to camp," Felice cautioned them. 
"And try to get some more blue lacquer at the Fair. The stuff 
that Old Man Kawai used to coat the Spear is starting to peel 
off." 
They relaxed then, and as the midnight moon came up over the Rhone, Fitharn and Firvulag returned 
with forage and fresh 
food. Madame took the gnomish little exotic aside and told him such of their plans as seemed 
expedient. 
"So you see," she concluded, "that in a few hours most of our people will be embarked upon the 
river, while Claude and 
I conceal ourselves near Castle Gateway and await the day when we shall deal our double blow 
against the Tanu slave-.masters. And now. you are free to leave us, my friend. Take with you the 
profound gratitude of our company... and of all 
free humanity. Tell King Yeochee what we hope to do. And 
bid him for me—farewell." 
The little man squirmed within her mental clasp, crushing 
his pointed red hat between his hands. His alien consciousness, 
so hard to read even when the screens were down, was now 
all but walled off. The images that flickered through the near- opacity were colored with 
conflicting emotions. "You are troubled," Madame said softly. 
"Angelique..." The gnome's words and thoughts made a 
jumble: fear love loyalty mistrust hope doubt pain. 
"Dear little friend, what is it?" 
"Warn your people!" Fitharn burst out. "Tell them to trust 
no being too far! Even if they are successful, tell them to 
remember my warning!" 
His face looked up at hers for one last instant. Then he 
disappeared into the night..8 
THE GOLD-TORC LADY AND HER STEWARD HOVERED BEFORE 
the Firvulag jeweler's display while the rest of their retinue, 
guards and serving women, prevented the fairground multitude 
from pressing too close. 
"I wonder if this one is suitable, Claudius?" the woman 
asked. "Or is it perhaps so large as to be vulgar?" 
The old gray-torc looked with disdain upon the amber paper-weight 
that the jeweler's assistant proffered on a velvet cushion. 
"It has," the steward declared, "bugs in it." 
"But they are part of the originality of the piece!" the jeweler 
protested. "Caught at the moment of their ancient mating 
hundreds of millions of years ago! The two insects, male and 
female, united in their nuptial embrace forever within this glow-ing 
gem! Is it not poignant, Exalted Lady? Does it not touch 
your heart?" 
The lady peeped askance at her steward. "Do you find it touching, mon vieux?" 
The jeweler waxed rapturous. "It comes from the darkest 
depths of Fennoscandia, from the Black Lake's haunted shores! 
We Firvulag do not dare to harvest this amber, my Lady. We 

obtain it!"—he paused dramatically—"from Howlers!" 
"Tana have mercy!" the gold-torc lady whispered, eyes wide. 
"So you really do trade with the wild ones! Tell me, good 
jeweler... are the Howlers really as hideous to the eye as rumor 
has it?" 
"To see one," the artisan assured her, keeping a solemn 
face, "is to go mad." 
The lady bent a satirical eye upon her silver-haired servitor. 
"I have suspected as much. Ah, yes." 
The jeweler's assistant ventured to remark, "Some persons.believe that this year—because of the 
unrest y'see—the How- lers have even dared to come south!" 
The lady squealed in alarm. 
Her captal, a huge man with a face like seamed cordovan, 
slapped his sword hilt. "Now then, Foeman! Beware how you 
attempt to frighten our noble mistress!" 
"Oh, Galucholl is quite right, brave Captal," the jeweler 
made quick to say. "And let me assure you that we of the True 
Folk are quite as alarmed about the matter as you. Te only 
knows what the ugly devils want. But we shall be alert lest 
they come slinking among us during the games." 
The woman shivered in delicious dread. "How exciting! 
How terrible! We will purchase the amber, jeweler. I am most 
taken with the doomed insect lovers. Pay him, Claudius." 
Grumbling, the steward took coins from his belt wallet. 
Then his eye fell upon a tray of rings and he began to smile. 
"We'll take two of those as well, I think. Wrap them up." 
"But, sir!" protested the Firvulag. "The carved-jet rings have 
a certain symbolic significance that you may not be aware—" 
The old man's icy green eyes blazed under their white brows. 
"I said, we'll take them! Now get those fornicating termites 
under wraps and be quick about it. We're going to be late for 
an appointment!" 
"Yes, yes, right away, Worthy Master. Get a move on, Galucholl, you young lout!" The jeweler bowed 
to Madame 
Guderian as he handed the soft pouch to the steward. "Good 
fortune attend you, Exalted Lady, and may you enjoy your 
purchases." The old gray-torc laughed. In a manner overly presumptuous 
for one of his status, he took the woman by one elbow and 
signaled for the escort to close in around their mistress. 
When the customers had disappeared into the crowd, Gal-ucholl 
said, "Well, he could have been buying the rings for 
someone else." 
The artisan gave a laugh that bespoke long experience. "Oh, 
my boy. What an innocent you are." 
Gert stuck his sandy head and one arm into the tent. "Here 
y'go, Madame. All sliced neatly in half. Didn't even disturb 
the poor bugs." 
"Thank you, my son. Claude and I will finish the work. 
Since it is almost noon, you and the others had best take your 
positions on the high rocks around our campsite. At the slightest.sign of alarm you must notify me 
so that I can cease the 
transmission." 
"Right you are, Madame." The head vanished. 
"Here's the message." Claude held out the ceramic wafer. 
"Just like yours, but with my signature. You have the cement?" 
She bent over the pieces of amber that lay on the decamole 
table. "Viola," she said at last. "It is ready. One for you to 
carry and one for me, par mesure de securite. I shall keep the 
one with the pathetic termites, even though you have signed 
it. It is fitting." 
The two of them considered the message carriers. Shining 

through the reddish-gold fossilized resin were the words of the 
sandwiched wafers: 
PLIOCENE EUROPE UNDER CONTROL OF MALIGN EXOTIC 
RACE. CLOSE TIME-GATE FOR THE LOVE OF GOD. IGNORE 
ANY SUBSEQUENT MESSAGES TO CONTRARY. 
"Will they believe us, do you suppose?" she asked. 
"They can check our signatures easily enough. And, as you 
said, two witnesses are better than one. Nobody'd ever suspect 
a straight old lace like me of pulling a hoax." 
They sat together, saying nothing. It was very hot in the 
closed tent. She brushed a lock of graying hair back from her 
brow. A rivulet of sweat trickled in front of one ear. 
"You are a fool, you know," she said finally. 
"Polacks are suckers for bossy women. You should have 
known Gen! Sector chiefs were known to flinch like whipped 
curs before her black wrath. Besides, I'm too old-fashioned to 
compromise myself with a piece like you, hiding in a trapdoor-spider 
burrow for a week with my poor old nuts singing the 
'Marseillaise' while the rest of my equipment tries not to stand 
at attention." 
"Quel homme! C'est incroyable!" 
"Not for Polacks." He consulted his watch. "Fifteen seconds until noon. On your mark, old woman." 
Elizabeth and Dionket the Lord Healer looked down on the black-torc child in its cot. A 
fullblooded Tanu, it seemed to 
the human woman to be older than its actual age of three 
years—not only because of the longer limbs, but also in the 
overglaze of suffering on its still-beautiful face. The child was naked except for a towel laid 
over its loins..A water mattress supported the swollen body as comfortably 
as was possible in this tankless medical technology. The child's 
skin was a dark red; peripheral body parts such as digits, ears, 
nose, and lips were almost black with congestion. Beneath the 
small golden torc, the neck was blistered, clotted with some 
white salve applied in a futile attempt at soothing. Elizabeth 
slid into the ruined infant mind. Livid eyelids opened, showing 
fully dilated pupils. 
Dionket said, "Removing the torc would only make him 
worse. Then there would be convulsions as well. Note the 
degeneration of the neural linkages between the cerebellum and 
the limbic areas, the anomalous circuits from the torc to the 
premotor cortex, the chaotic firing within the amygdala that 
has frustrated our own attempts at analgesia. Onset of the syn-drome 
is typically abrupt—five days ago in the case of this 
boy. Death will ensue within approximately three weeks." 
Elizabeth rested one hand upon the hot blond curls. 
Ah baby there baby lie easy poorlambie let me see let me 
in to look to help ah there the relentless conduits between gold 
and charged flesh where misery ramps to and fro poor baby... ah. 
See. I quench it sever the controlinterface between highbrain 
and low admitting peace so rest now wait now and sleep until 
they come bright to carry thee away poor baby matured at last 
in the light. 
The small eyes closed. The body relaxed into flaccidity. 
Elizabeth you have removed his pain Tanabethanked. 
Refusing as always to meet his mind, she turned away from 
the cot. "He will still die. I can bring no cure, only relief until 
the end." But if you stayed longer if you experimented... 
"I must go." 
You could have gone but you have not. Shall I tell you why 
you have stayed with us even though your balloon waits for 
you in the room without doors? 
"I have stayed to teach Brede, as I promised." Nothing— 

no shred of empathy passed her mental screen. But Dionket 
Lord Healer was old, and there are other ways of reading souls. 
You have stayed with us in spite of your professed disdain 
in spite of your selfish self because you have been touched... 
"Of course I've been touched! And repelled! And I will go 
away. Now—shall we continue to waste time in futile sparring, 
or shall we see whether I can help you with these wretched 
babies?".Elizabeth Brede is so close to understanding her vision if 
you would only help her to interpret— 
"Brede is a spider! The Host of Nontusvel warned me of 
that. At least they're honest barbarians, making no bones about 
their antagonism. But Brede weaves metapsychic webs and I 
say to hell with her!" The spill of bitterness was swiftly re-confined. 
"Shall we get on with it, or not? And speak out loud 
to me, please, Lord Healer." 
He sighed. "I'm sorry. Brede—and all of us—have only 
sought to keep you with us because of our great need. We have 
not given proper consideration to your need. Forgive us, Eliz-abeth." 
She smiled. "Of course. Now tell me what percentage of 
your Tanu children are afflicted with this terrible thing?" 
"Seven. The syndrome that we call 'black torc' may appear 
among purebloods at any age up until the approximate onset 
of puberty, after which the adaptation to the torc is presumably 
in homeostasis. Most of the cases are under four years of age. 
With the hybrids, there is never a danger of black torc, only 
of the incompatibility dysfunctions that pureblood humans may 
experience when wearing the device. Severe though the dys-functions 
may be, with careful redactive treatment they can 
usually be remitted. But we have been powerless to help these 
black-torc children ... until now. Your execution of the era-sures 
and cutoff was astounding! You of the Milieu are ad-vanced 
far beyond us in deep redaction. Even if you will not 
stay—may I hope that you will at least relieve the rest of these 
suffering little ones before you leave us?" 
O Yes? Immerse in more innocent agony 'breast more wail-ing 
dumb endurance so useless unchanneled unproductive evil 
rending of me and it poor babies why so ungodly why these 
everbedamned torcs? It is our way Elizabeth the only way we know how could 
we turn away from even this simulacrum of operancy once 
knowing it could you? 
Their massive egos confronted one another, naked in power 
for the most fleeting instant before veiling. But she had looked 
down on Dionket the Healer in her mightiness, and he had 
abased himself and entreated and offered—what was it he 
offered?—and he had shown her how many others there were 
like him. 
Tears started to Elizabeth's eyes. She would have lashed.out, but she knew that this man at least 
was no manipulator. 
And so her response was gentle. 
"I can't play the role you ask of me, Dionket. My reasons are complex and personal, but there are 
practical considerations 
that I will point out to you. The Host of Nontusvel still means 
to kill me, even though they know that Gomnol's scheme of 
mating me with the King has been forbidden by Brede. The 
Host is even more worried now that I might bear children by 
Aiken Drum—or team up with him somehow during the Grand 
Combat! You know me well enough by now to see the im-possibility 
of either notion. But the Host think only of their 
dynasty. Right now, they're too distracted by Combat prepa-rations 
to mount more than an occasional attack on me, but 
I'm still not safe sleeping anywhere but in Brede's room without 

doors. You and your faction could never protect me from No-donn 
and a massed thrust coordinated by him. When I'm sleep-ing, 
I'm vulnerable. And they're determined. I won't live the 
rest of my days imprisoned in Brede's house or fending off 
mindbolts from that pack of mental savages." 
"We are trying to change the old pitiless ways!" Dionket 
cried. "You could help us in our struggle against the Host!" 
"My mind-set is wholly nonaggressive. As you know. Bring 
about your great changes first and then ask me to help." 
"As Tana wills," he said, resigned. "When do you depart 
from us?" 
"Soon," she said, looking down again at the sleeping child. "I'll take care of all the rest of 
these black-torc children for 
you while you and your best people observe. You may be able 
to learn the program." 
"We will be deeply grateful for your guidance... And now, 
if you will agree, we will leave this chamber of mind-hurt for 
a time. Even though you screen it away, I know that you are 
diminished by contact with the black-torcs. We will go to the 
terrace, beyond reach of their pathetic aura." 
The towering form in red and white walked from the ward 
into cool stone corridors, past screens of marble filigree and onto a great garden balcony. There 
was a stupendous view of 
Muriah from up here on the Mount of Heroes, and they could 
see a long stretch of the Aven Peninsula, the saltflats, and the 
lagoons all spread below in the clean loud scorch of the noon 
sun. The crying of the pain-filled young minds was blotted out 
in the solar emanation. The light so dazzled Elizabeth that she 
faltered, momentarily blinded—.—and perceived the call. 
Elizabeth Orme Farspeaker respond. 
Dionket said something solicitous. Taking her arm, he guided her into a shaded corner where there 
were wicker chairs. 
Elizabeth! Elizabeth! 
So faint, so garbled, so human, but who? 
"Your experience with our poor little ones has affected you, 
my dear. It's no wonder. Sit here and I'll fetch a restorative." 
Could Dionket have heard? But no. It was on the uniquely 
human mode and almost beyond her own perception, much 
less his. "Just—something to drink," she said. "Anything cold." 
"Of course. I'll return immediately." 
Elizabeth! 
Whoyou whereyou I Elizabeth respond. Me/us! Felice/AngeliqueGuderian! ThankGoditworked 0 
damn quick losing mindmeld t u ne nar r o w An gel i ... 
I have you Madame Guderian. Graceadieu we were soafraid we called solong noresponse 
listen we are someofus coming to you sabotage torcworks re-quire 
help AikenDrum if trustworthy do you think can you 
vouch? 
Aiken? 
Yesyes himalone le petit farceur! Ifonly wecantrustOlisten 
this how thisway it is... Elizabeth listened in astonishment to the faint babbling thoughts 
inexpertly squirting data, smearing a crazy quilt of 
mind-pictures and clumsy subvocalizations, the whole so clogged 
with anxiety, so wavering and distant that only a Master could 
have made sense out of it. What an incredibly bold plan! But 
these human rebels had already accomplished the incredible at 
Finiah, hadn't they? This scheme, too, might succeed. But— 
Aiken Drum? What could she tell them about him, his mind 
now impervious even to her, doubtless of masterclass potential, 
perhaps even gone fully operant by now. What could she tell 
them about the laughing little nonborn chosen of Mayvar King-maker? 
Brede? 

Elizabeth I hear. Prognosticate. (DATA) 
Do it. 
Harmless?.Never that nonhuman is. 
Harmless forbest myfriends humanity atlarge? 
(Irony.) Longview affirm falsealoof Elizabeth. 
Damn you . . . 
Madame Guderian? 
Yes Elizabeth. 
I will relay your request to Aiken Drum without telling him 
more than he needs to know about your plan of action. I believe 
it to be in humanity's longterm best interest to include him in 
your scheme. But there may be shortterm danger. Be wary. I 
will continue to do what I can for you for as long as I can. 
Othankyoumerci butit will be dangerous pourl'amour dedieu 
be withus Elizabeth we cannot/mustnot fail (fear guilt hope). 
Elizabeth? 
Be at peace Angelique Guderian. And all of you my friends... 
"Here now!" Dionket proffered a tray. "Cold orange juice 
should be the very thing to restore you. Vitamin C, potassium, 
and many other good things in this splendid Earth fruit." 
Elizabeth smiled and accepted the crystal tumbler. The far-away 
mental voice had disappeared amid the bedlam of other 
thought waves. 
Seized by uncontrollable laughter, Stein fetched his com-panion 
a herculean whack on the back. The small figure dressed 
in gold stood as firmly as a metal statue. 
"Aiken.. .kid! Isn't that the damnedest absofuckinlutely 
greatest news you ever heard in your life? They're coming! 
Our good ole Group Green pals are coming with their pockets 
full of iron and a friggerty big zapper that we can blast the 
chickenshit Tanu into orbit with! And they can cut off our torcs! 
Sukey and me can be free! All of the humans who don't want 
to wear these things can be free! Would you believe it?" 
Aiken Drum smiled his golliwog smile. "That's what Elizabeth 
says." The two of them were on a balcony of Mayvar's apartment 
in the Hall of Farsensors. Their interrupted lunch lay uneaten 
on the table before them. The high hot sun shone upon the 
holiday-decked capital city, aswarm with Tanu and human vis-itors. 
Out on the shimmering White Silver Plain to the south, 
thousands of small black Firvulag tents spread in serried ranks, 
together with larger pavilions of ochre and rusty red and other.earthen hues that sheltered the 
nobility of the Little People. 
Great bleachers with awnings colored scarlet and blue and 
purple and rosy gold were being completed on both sides of 
the great Field of Lists where the sporting contests were to be 
held prior to the blood events of the Combat proper. 
Stein, bareheaded and wearing only a lightweight tunic, 
clutched his cup of iced mead so firmly that the silver threatened 
to buckle. "How about it, kid? Do you really think you can 
recharge that photon cannon thing they're bringing?" 
"Can't say for sure until I eyeball her, Steinie. But if it's 
just a matter of figuring how to open a fewkin' powerpack like 
Madame said, it should be el cincho to a genius like Me." 
"Hot damn!" The giant tossed his drink off and slammed 
the goblet onto the table. "I'm sure as hell gettin' in on the 
blanket party for the torc works! Think they might let me do 
the zapping? There's nobody can teach this boy any tricks in 
how to handle light-blasters... or were you figuring to join the 
zorch yourself?" 
Aiken's grin became bemused. He took a daisylike flower 
from the table centerpiece and started to pick off the petals. 

"Who, me? Strike a blow for human freedom and the destruc-tion 
of the Tanu kingdom? Me use the Spear of Lugonn? Pissy 
patoot, my man! I probably couldn't even lift the fewkin' thing." 
He dropped petals into the congealed gravy on his plate. "You 
know, Steinie, that Spear—the zapper, I mean—is really a 
sacred thing to these exotic folks. Humans using it in war has 
caused the biggest stink since the Tanu first came to Earth a 
thousand years ago. The Spear was one of two photon weapons 
the exotics brought here from their home galaxy for ceremonial 
fights between great heroes. The second one is smaller, called 
the Sword of Sharn. Used to belong to an old Firvulag warlord. 
Now it's only used as a championship trophy in their Grand 
Combat. Nodonn's got it." 
Stein smote the table. "We'll show that bastard! We'll show 
the whole bunch of 'em! No more human slaves. No more 
filthy breeding schemes. Without a steady supply of torcs, this 
whole goddam Tanu setup is gonna fall apart!" 
Aiken inspected the shredded blossom with comic dismay. 
"Sure seems like that's what would happen... Poor li'l flower. 
All ruined." 
Stein shoved back his chair. "Let's go tell Sukey! She's 
been worrying her heart out, hiding away there in Redact House."."Maybe we better hold off on 
that," Aiken said casually. 
"You know. The fewer who know a secret..." 
"She'd never tell." 
"Not willingly." Aiken did not look at Stein. "She's safe 
where Dionket and Creyn put her. But there are other redac-tors— 
unfriendly ones—floating around that place, too. If Su-key's 
thoughts just happened to drift a little one day, a really 
top digger like Culluket Prettyface might get wind of our little 
conspiracy. All Sukey would have to do is imagine the Spear. 
Conjure up an image of you shooting it, for instance." 
Stein was stricken. "Sweet Jesus, Aiken! Can't we bring 
her over here with us?" 
"I couldn't cover her the way the friendly redactors can. 
She'll have to stay there until the northerners get here with 
their iron chisel. Then I can cut off her torc, and yours, too, 
and you can sail away into the sunrise just like I promised. I 
gotta confess, kiddo—until we got this crazy flash from Eliz-abeth 
and Madame, I didn't have the least fewkin' idea how I 
was gonna carry out my promise to you two. But with your 
torcs off so you guys are out of the Tanu mind-net, so to speak, 
it won't be that hard." 
"Can't get this thing off fast enough for me." Stein gave a 
futile tug at his own gray collar. "Lately, just in the last week, 
like, I been getting these screwy feelings. And it's this torc, 
kid! I know it is. I'll be doing nothin' special and all of a 
sudden an ordinary thing like a shadow makes me jump like a 
goosed moose. Or I'll feel like the worst goddamn monster in 
the world is right behind me, reachin' out. And I dassn't turn 
around and look, because that's all that keeps it from jumpin' 
me..." 
"Don't sweat it," the trickster said. "Four, five days, you'll 
be bareneck and free as a bird and on your way to the Spaghetti 
Islands with your lady." 
Stein gripped the arms of the little man in gold. "And you, 
too, right, Aiken?" 
"Aw." The mischief-maker's eyes slid away. "I was having 
fun here in King, Arthur's Court. And the Combat's nearly 
here. I think I might just be able to take some of these turdlings. 
Win myself a fair lady or a spare kingdom or something." 

Stein roared with laughter. "And end up with stir-fried brains! 
You can have your kingdom, sweetheart. What's left of it when 
me and Madame's gang get finished!" He started for the bal-.cony doors. "I'm going to Sukey. I 
won't say a word about 
the zapper. Just tell her things are looking up. Okay?" 
Aiken held up the mangled stem of the daisy. Slowly, it 
straightened. The bruised disc plumped and restored itself. 
Lavender ray-florets sprang out anew, crisp and perfect. 
"And we thought you were a goner, li'l flower!" Aiken 
chortled. "It just goes to show—don't jump to conclusions!" 
Rising off the ground, he tucked the flower behind Stein's 
ear. Then he returned to the normal mode of human locomotion 
and strutted away, whistling, "Over the Sea to Skye." 
They did it around the campfire at nightfall, since it had been decided that the two old people 
would have to leave 
Roniah and go into hiding that night, with the rest of the party 
embarking for the south at dawn on the morrow. 
"It's appropriate," Amerie said when they were all together, 
"that the traditional Introit for this service should be King 
David's prayer for victory. It can serve for all of us as well as 
for Claude and Angelique. 
May the Lord send you help from his holy place 
and defend you from Mount Zion! 
May he grant you your heart's desire 
and make all your plans succeed! 
Now repeat after me: 'I, Angelique, take thee, Claude ...'".9 
Lord Greg-Donnet came scampering into the computer room 
of Creation House as Bryan and Ogmol were feeding in the 
very last of the data. His turquoise tailcoat was fresh and 
clean and he had a huge white rose in his buttonhole. 
"I've been looking all over for you to tell you the news! 
And then Katlinel said you were in here, so I hurried as fast 
as—" He broke off as he caught sight of the dog-eared 
notebooks and storage-plaques that Bryan was packing away 
into his wicker portfolio. "The survey? Don't tell me you're 
ready to finalize it!" 
"Why, yes, Greggy." Bryan smiled. "We could have spent 
months more on it, but King Thagdal was explicit about 
having some sort of results before Combat time, so we're 
doing the final digest today. The King will have two weeks 
to study it and confer with us before he presents it to the 
High Table, or whatever." 
"How exciting!" crowed the Genetics Master. "Will you 
let me order the printout, Bryan? Will you?" 
"Why, certainly. Just give Ogmol another minute or two." 
Greg-Donnet began to jump up and down, hugging himself. 
"I love it when the plaques come pouring out! Can we print 
scads and scads?" 
"Only three for now, I'm afraid," the anthropologist said. 
"The survey must be confidential until King Thagdal approves 
it for general circulation. His Majesty was very firm about 
that." 
Greg-Donnet's lower lip thrust out pettishly. "Spoilsport! 
There's no fun when the computer prints only three."."Greggy published five thousand copies of his 
new plot 
of the metapsychic latency coefficients," Ogmol remarked, 
looking up from the input mouthpiece. "Better hurry up and 
reserve yours, Bry. There are only about four thousand nine 
hundred and ninety-one left.. .That's the last of our stuff. 
We're ready to go." 
Bryan gestured to the control console. "Be our guest, 

Greggy. But only three: one for the King, one for Ogmol, 
and one for me." 
The madman seized the mouthpiece. His little old baby 
face regained its usual good-humored expression. "Stand back, 
everyone!.. .Begin sysprint plaque opren-three-shutpren sent 
end. Wheee!" 
The machine, stoically ignoring the last indigestible byte, 
labored for six seconds and brought forth a trio of ten-by-sixteencent 
rectangles of pale-green plass, entitled: 
SOCIOECONOMIC STRESS PATTERNS 
DEMONSTRATED IN TANU-HUMAN 
CULTURAL INTERACTION 
—A Preliminary Survey— 
BRYAN D. GRENFELL OGMOL urJOHANNA-Centre 
for Anthropological BURNS vulTHAGDAL 
Studies Guild of Creators London 51:30N, 00:10W Muriah 39:54N,04:15E Sol-3 Soi-3 
"Doesn't that look authoritative?" Greggy squeaked, 
snatching one of the plaques from the hopper. "Just like back 
home! Let me read just the abstract, Bry. Pretty please!" 
Bryan lifted the book out of the Genetics Master's hand 
before he could press the contents activator and stuffed it 
into the inside pocket of his own jacket. "I promise you'll 
be the first to read it after the King gives his approval. You'll 
just have to be patient, Greggy." 
Ogmol took his own copy of the book and the one intended 
for his royal father. "This is sensitive material, Greggy. Not 
to be bandied about lightly." 
"Oh, cockypop!" the adult infant cried. "I've a good mind 
now not to tell you my news! That's why I was looking for.you two. So you wouldn't miss the fun. 
But if you're going to be such meanies—" 
"When the King gives his consent," Bryan soothed, "I'll 
see to it that you get your very own copy in a fine red leather 
case. Stamped in gold. With your name on it." 
Greggy beamed. "Oh, very well, I was only joking. I 
wouldn't want you to miss Lady Mercy-Rosmar's formal 
challenge to the Craftsmaster!" "Omnipotent Tana!" Ogmol exclaimed. "So she's really 
going through with it? Going up against Aluteyn at the Combat in the manifestation of powers?" 
"You bet!" said Greg-Donnet. "The King and Queen are 
here to watch the challenge, and ever so many others." 
Bryan could only stand stunned into silence. But Ogmol 
was saying, "Does the grapevine give her a chance for the 
presidency, Greggy? I've been so out of it working on this 
survey that I can hardly separate one intrigue from another 
any more. I suppose Nodonn's behind the challenge. Mark 
my words—he and the rest of the Host won't rest until they've 
taken over all the Guilds! Just look how Riganone keeps 
crowding Mayvar over at Farsense. And Culluket would chal-lenge 
Dionket as Lord Healer if his psychopotential only 
measured up to his power-itch." 
"Mercy's brought the cauldron and all," Greg-Donnet said. 
"She'll give us some kind of demonstration, bet on that, 
Creative Brother. It should be quite a giggle! I feel sorry for 
poor old Aluteyn, though. It's tough to do your best for years 
and years in a hard job when people aren't all that fond of 
you—and then have some charismatic young charmer come 
along." 
Ogmol laughed. "Bryan knows all about the lady's charm! 
Secure the data, Bry, and let's go." 
The anthropologist seemed to snap out of his preoccu-pation. 
He spoke his private locking-encodement into the 
computer's input, shut the machine down, took his portfolio, 

and started to follow his exotic co-worker. 
Greg-Donnet was rummaging in a cabinet. "You go on 
ahead, colleagues. I want to bring some of my reports down 
to the rotunda. Everybody's there! It's a wonderful chance 
to corner people, ha-ha!" 
After the two had gone, Greg-Donnet let his own plaque- books fall to the floor in a heedless 
clatter. He darted to the 
rear of the computer and slid open a small door in the opaque.glass of the data storage module. 
Inside was a miniaturized 
manual terminal, part of the maintenance system of the ancient 
machine, which had been transported piecemeal to the Pli-ocene 
by a notably persuasive technician during the earliest 
days of the auberge. The stylus for the tiny stallboard had 
disappeared years ago; but Greggy, who had been a great 
and good friend of the long-dead computer technician, had 
tucked an old gnawed pencil stub inside the redundant terminal 
as a substitute. It was quite adequate for tapping out any 
number of outre and useful instructions, including overrides 
of lock-codes. 
Greg-Donnet pecked: 
EXEC 'ALGOVERIDE' LLLL 
BEGIN RETRIEVE DT (T) 
AUTHORS: 
GRENFELL + OGMOL; 
BEGIN SYSPRINT PLAQ (1); 
BEGIN EXPUNGE; 
END 
There was a ruminative buzz. A single pale-green plaque 
fell with a muted click into the hopper. The computer made 
no sound at all as it obliterated from its memory the entire 
body of data that Bryan and Ogmol had stored within it. 
Greg-Donnet patted the machine, tittering, and tucked his 
copy of the survey into a pocket beneath one of the tails of 
his clawhammer coat. 
"Tidy graphs and learned jargon! Statistics and correlations 
and extrapolations of dire, dire portents! No surprise to me, 
of course. Who needs an anthropologist to point out the deluge 
coming? Naughty humanity! Imagine poor Thaggy thinking 
we'd been good for his people! Won't he be shocked to find 
that Nodonn was right about us? And here it is—all spelled 
out by clever Bryan and simple Oggy—the fate of humanity 
and the Tanu-human hybrids writ so plain that even the most 
thick-headed of the Host will understand... Ah, Bryan. With 
Oggy riding herd on you, you'd just tamely hand the thing 
over to the King and trust in his good sense not to do the 
obvious. Or do you even see the obvious, Bryan?... And 
they call me crazy!" 
He went back to the scattered books on the floor, formed.them into a neat stack, and skipped away 
with it. With a little luck, he wouldn't have missed any of the fireworks. 
Ogmol led Bryan through a secret passageway that even-tually 
opened into an alcove hard by the dais of Creation 
House's great rotunda. The nook was shielded by curtains of 
an ingenious weave that provided a one-way view into the 
chamber. "An old guard cubbyhole from the Times of Unrest five 
hundred years ago," Ogmol whispered. "All the Guild head-quarters 
have them, and the secret passages, too. But no one 
bothers with them any more except Gomnol and his coercers. 
You know how paranoid about security they are." 
Bryan was paying little attention to the explanation of his 
companion, nor did he waste much time on the High Faculty 
already seated on the dais around the empty throne of silver 

encrusted with beryls that was the accustomed seat of Aluteyn 
Craftsmaster. The anthropologist recognized perhaps half of 
the top-ranking creators: the aged musician Luktal, Renian 
Glasscrafter, Clana the illusion-spinning daughter of the Queen 
and her blood-sister Anear, Seniet the Lord Historian, Lord 
Celadeyr of Afaliah, Ariel the Sage, and the two talented 
hybrids of the High Table, Katlinel the Darkeyed and Al-beronn 
Mindeater. 
The rotunda proper was jammed almost from wall to wall 
with hundreds of Guild members, dressed in various per-mutations 
of their heraldic blue-green with white or silver. 
There were also a great many outsiders of high rank who had, Ogmol explained, either wangled guest 
passes or simply 
crashed what should have been strictly an inhouse ceremony. 
"See there?" Ogmol pointed. "Those two in the hooded 
white cloaks? The Thagdal and Nontusvel in mufti! Dressed 
like that, they're officially nonpresent, so no one need pay 
any special attention to them." 
The royal incogniti had, however, been accorded front-row 
standing room next to the dais. 
"Here's Lady Eadone," said Ogmol. "Now we'll begin." 
The tall silver-clad woman, flanked by two male attendants 
in silver niello half-armor, came out and stood at the right 
side of the stage. Somewhere the chain jangled. There was 
dead silence. Bryan now had no difficulty understanding Ea-done's 
speech. 
"Creative Brothers and Sisters! We are in extraordinary.assembly. According to the most ancient 
rules of our fellow-ship, 
I stand forth as speaker until the matter of this meeting 
shall find resolution. Let my action be noted." "The action of the Dean of Guilds is so noted," 
declared 
all of the members. 
Eadone said, "Let Aluteyn Craftsmaster, President of the 
Guild of Creators, come forth and assume his rightful place." 
There was a low murmur from the crowd. From the wings 
opposite the alcove where Bryan and Ogmol hid came a stout 
figure in a richly jeweled caftan. Aluteyn posed for a moment 
in front of his throne, his silvery-gold hair and mustache 
abristle with static. In a loud, harsh voice he said, "I take 
my seat, yielding the speakership freely to the Fivefold Be-nevolence 
of the Lady Dean." He plumped himself down, 
spread his legs, and hunched forward with arms angled and 
hands resting on his knees: He looked as though he was 
ready to spring at the first sign of restiveness in the ranks. 
"Lord President and fellow Creators," Eadone declaimed. 
"There has been presented, with due process, a challenge." 
The throng uttered a sound like a wave breaking gently on 
an offshore bar. "Let the challenger come forward and be 
heard." 
A small commotion broke out on the side of the rotunda 
opposite the dais. The crowd opened an aisle leading toward 
the throne. The creators and the curious aristocrats of Muriah 
craned their necks. A few even had the bad manners to levitate 
slightly in an attempt to get a better view as Mercy entered. 
"Way!" sang a herald near the entrance. "Way for the 
Exalted Lady Mercy-Rosmar, Creative Sister to us all, wife 
to Nodonn Battlemaster Lord of Goriah, and challenger this 
day before the extraordinary assembly of the Creator Guild!" 
Watching her, Bryan felt his heart contract within him. 
She had put off the rose-and-gold colors of her awesome 
husband and assumed those of her adopted guild. Her long 

gown was silver tissue cut at the edges in long dags and 
scallops resembling butterfly wings; like wings also were the 
patterns of iridescent greenish blue that made great swirls 
and eyespots which appeared and disappeared on the fabric 
as she approached Aluteyn. Her auburn hair hung free. Mercy 
was followed by four brawny gray-torcs in the livery of House 
Nodonn pushing a wheeled trolley of polished wood. Upon 
it reposed a large and ornate cauldron, apparently made of 
gold.."It is the Kral," Ogmol whispered, "the sacred vessel of 
our Guild which is usually seen by the commonalty and 
membership only at the Grand Combat. Traditionally, the 
Lord Creator must fill it at that time for the edification of 
all Combatants." 
"What's Mercy doing with it now?" Bryan demanded. But 
Ogmol only gestured for him to watch. 
The human woman had reached the foot of the dais, where 
an area perhaps ten by ten was opened for her. She made a 
sign. Her attendants placed the cauldron on the floor in the 
center of the space, then stepped far back so as to leave 
Mercy standing alone with the great kettle beside her. 
"Speak your challenge, Mercy-Rosmar," said Eadone. 
The pale face lifted. Bryan imagined that he saw the sea-colored 
eyes go wide and wild. 
"I challenge Aluteyn Craftsmaster to defend his presidency 
of the Guild of Creators! I bid him stand forth at the man-ifestation 
of powers during the Grand Combat, contending 
with me in the exercise of creative metafunction, until by the 
express judgment of the King, the Dean of Guilds, and our 
noble membership, one of us shall be declared supreme over 
the other and shall assume the presidency; while the one 
vanquished shall choose between the quitting of this Kingdom 
of the Many-Colored Land and voluntary life-offering to the 
Goddess, whose Will shall in all things prevail." 
There was a roar from the crowd. Bryan turned to Ogmol. 
"What did she mean, for God's sake? Life-offering? Isn't 
that your orgy of ritual executions at the end of the games? 
Do you mean that the loser in this damned manifestation of 
powers forfeits his life?" 
"It is the most honorable course. But a few, such as 
Minanonn the Heretic, who was deposed by Nodonn, and 
Leyr the former Lord Coercer, overcome by Gomnol, have 
chosen the ignominy of banishment." 
Bryan cried out, "Mercy!" But Ogmol held him behind 
the concealing curtains and the sound of his voice was lost 
in the tumult. 
"You should feel the Craftsmaster's thoughts!" Ogmol 
fingered his golden torc. "Very bad form to let your hostility 
show like that, even if one is a First Comer. Watch this now, 
Bry. The validation, we call it. Can't have just any young 
upstart making the challenge, you know." 
Aluteyn had risen from his throne and now moved forward.until he was able to look down upon Mercy 
from the front 
of the dais. 
"I accept your challenge, Creative Sister—subject to your 
filling our sacred cauldron here and now, demonstrating the 
validity of your right to challenge. And first, you shall ex-tirpate 
the thing I place therein!" 
There was an explosion and an ammoniacal stench. The 
woman leapt back as a slimy apparition materialized out of 
the golden kettle. Its body was sinuous but without scales, 
dripping foul mucus. There were pores along the heaving 

sides like small portholes. Groping filaments the size of elon-gated 
human fingers fringed its head. It resembled a monstrous 
eel, perhaps meters in length and nearly a meter in diameter, 
oozing forth from the cauldron toward Mercy while Aluteyn 
watched with folded arms and a sour smile. The creature had 
no proper mouth. Its head terminated in a species of funnel 
lined with carunculated ridges; inside gleamed row upon row 
of sharp triangular teeth. From the gullet of the monster 
protruded a tongue-like member as thick as a human forearm, 
studded with rasps. 
"Good God, what is it?" cried Bryan. 
"A lamprey fish, I'd say—or a simulacrum of one, more likely, 
unless he had this fellow stashed away and magnified him. Not 
a particularly ingenious effort. Perhaps Aluteyn thought your la-dy's 
sensitivities would be overcome by its horrid appearance. 
But she doesn't seem to be intimidated ... ha! Watch!" 
Mercy stood her ground with resolution as the thing hung 
over her, its horrid lips aquiver and tongue groping for prey. 
"The Craftsmaster has given you a fish!" she cried in a loud 
voice. "I will give you its accompaniment!" 
There was a second detonation, together with a great cloud 
of steam that swathed Mercy and the giant lamprey swaying 
above the cauldron. Abruptly, the stench in the air vanished. 
There was another aroma, one that was not only pleasant but 
mouth-watering—and quite familiar to Bryan the former Lon-doner. 
The vapors parted and there stood the auburn-haired 
sorceress with her huge kettle filled to the brim with small 
things that were golden-brown and smoking and giving off that 
delicious fragrance together with a complementary smell of 
fried potatoes. 
Mercy began scattering the kettle contents to the crowd. 
Bryan collapsed in laughter against the wall of the alcove,.as much from relief as from any other 
emotion. "Oh, my dear! That's showing him!" 
Ogmol said, "I presume this is some human in-joke." 
The throng of Guild members and nobles were catching 
the tidbits that Mercy threw and devouring them with hilarious 
cheers. Aluteyn turned his back on the scene. 
Lady Eadone declared, "Let it be noted that the challenger, 
Lady Mercy-Rosmar, has demonstrated her right to meet Lord 
Aluteyn Craftsmaster in the manifestation of powers. Until 
that time, let the two of you dwell in the peace and fellowship 
of our Guild. This extraordinary assembly is now adjourned." 
"Lady Mercy-Rosmar farspeaks you through me," Ogmol 
said to Bryan. "She has perceived our presence behind the 
curtains because of the—er—cri de coeur you uttered when 
you realized she was placing herself in peril by issuing the 
challenge. She wishes to reassure you. She further asks that 
you meet her tonight in the Creators' Forecourt, where she 
will arrive in her caleche at twenty-one hundred hours. She 
wishes to discuss important matters with you." 
"Assure her that I'll be waiting." 
The Tanu-human bowed in a strangely formal manner. "I 
must go now to present the results of our survey to my Awful 
Father." 
"Yes, of course. Well, why don't I wander back to my rooms for a bit—and then a swim. Will you 
join me later?" 
"I fear not, Bryan. The interview with the King may take 
some time." 
"Well, give him my compliments." The anthropologist was 
jovial. "Later, I'll tell him myself what a good job you've 
done. I've never seen anyone pick up cultural theory so 

quickly. Perhaps the King will authorize us to do a broader 
study along these lines. I'd like to continue working with 
you, Ogmol." Still displaying the air of distance that was at variance to 
his usual friendliness, Ogmol held out a golden-furred hand 
for Bryan to shake. "I've enjoyed working with you, too, 
Bryan." He opened the secret door and held it while the 
anthropologist slipped inside. "Good—good luck to you, 
Bryan! And thank you for the hangover pills!" 
Before the startled human could reply, the sliding panel 
closed in his face. He was alone in the dim passage between 
the walls. 
"Funny." Bryan took out the pale-green rectangle of his.survey and stared at it. "We did a 
workmanlike job, given the short time available. An interesting overview, all in all. 
Old Thagdal should be pleased with it." 
But why, then, had Ogmol seemed apprehensive? Bryan 
hadn't a clue. "Perhaps I've been too close to the study during 
these hectic weeks," he told himself. "As a half-blood, Ogmol 
may be making a subjective evaluation of the survey relative 
to some exotic criteria of his own." 
Well, a little relaxation and he might noodle it out. Nothing 
like a good swim in Oggy's private pool to refresh his fatigued 
cortex. And then a drive with Mercy in the cool of the 
evening. 
He got to thinking about her and the fish and chips, and 
went off chuckling. The puzzle of Ogmol—and the plaque 
in his jacket pocket—were completely forgotten. 
On the dark summit of the Mount of Heroes there was a 
small open meadow between twin crags, far above the College 
of Redactors and the city and the gunmetal lagoons. They 
sent the old carriage driver away to wait and stood side by 
side in the utterly silent night. It seemed that they had come 
to a place between two different skies—the one above all 
distant and frosty and old, and the one below warm and 
exciting with the twinkling lights of three kinds of people— 
the olive-oil flames lit by humans, the jewel-lamps of the 
Tanu, and the massed bonfires of the Firvulag making a 
festive display out on the southern flats. 
"I think," Mercy said, "that my favorite thing in all this 
Many-Colored Land is the faerie look of the lights... and 
best of all when I see them from up high. Like this, from 
a mountain, or when flying with my Lord." 
She took a small backward step so that his arms could 
come around her. Her hair met his lips as she swayed back 
against him. "But I forgot that you've never flown with us, 
Bry. My poor earthbound one! When I'm able to go alone 
and lift another, I must take you. But in the meantime, we 
have this here tonight." 
She turned to him. The still-incredible thing began to 
happen again. Their minds and bodies came together in the 
ecstatic conjugation that seemed as far beyond ordinary sex 
as music was beyond noise. They lofted into ever-ascending 
levels of life-energy where balls of colored light pulsed and 
sang, clinging and crying out—she in triumph and he in.wonder and a kind of defiance that dared 
the love to become love-death if this was the only way to prolong it infinitely. 
But it could not be, never was, and always there was the 
brink and the tumble into deep dark while the glaring colors 
shrank and receded and went out. And he, swallowed, sated, 
was enfolded within her and flown safely back over the hollow 
waters, hearing her hush him as he mourned the end (again), ever asking, "Why doesn't this sea 
reflect the stars?" 
"Hush, love," she said. "Never mind." 

They lay quietly on her soft cloak. When his mind steadied he was able to look at her starlit face 
and very nearly recall 
what the fulfillment had been like (again). "It's enchantment, Mercy," he said. "You've bewitched 
me. Are you killing me, too?" 
"Does it matter?" she laughed, taking his head into her 
lap. A fold of fabric wiped his eyes and she kissed the lids. "It can't go on, can it?" he asked. 
"After the Combat, 
he'll take you back to Goriah. Or will you stay if you become Lady Creator? Is there a chance 
you'll stay, Mercy?" 
"Hush." "Do you love him?" he asked after a while. 
"Of course," she replied, her voice warm. "Do you love me?" He spoke low, his mouth partially 
muffled in her gown. 
"Would I be here with you if I didn't? Ah, my dear. Why must you always talk of loving and staying 
instead of the 
joy? Haven't you been happy? Haven't I given you all that 
I could, all that you could bear? Do you want the whole of it? Will nothing else satisfy you?" 
"I can't leave you. Oh, Mercy." The corners of her mouth turned up. "And you'd do 
anything for me, would you?" 
He gazed at her smile and could not speak. She began to hum, and the words of the familiar love 
ballad formed in his 
mind by the power of hers: 
Cupid is winged and doth range 
Her country, so my Love doth change. But change the earth or change the sky, 
Yet will I love her till I die. 
"And now we'll have one another again, sweet Bryan, 
and after that go down into the city. And you'll give me as.a gift the little book you've written, 
the book that promises such terrible things for my Tanu people if they continue on 
as before with the humans and all. But you never intended 
your book to apply to me, did you, Bryan?" 
"Oh, no. Not you." "I'm one of them, after all, and always have been. He 
knows that and so do you." 
"Yes... both of us know what you are." 
"But it's really a most upsetting thing you've written, 
sweetheart, particularly if the wrong people such as Culluket 
or Imidol should read it and misunderstand. Not even Nodonn 
can control the entire Host. And they believe all humankind 
to be harmful. Even me. Even the dear loyal hybrids. But 
you weren't to know that, were you? How your little book 
could be the death of us all. You'd never foresee such an 
interpretation... so earnest, so civilized and sane, my love." 
Bryan was puzzled, lost in his dreaming. The survey? That 
was only his work. "It has nothing at all to do with us, 
Mercy. Nothing to do with you. Enchantress." 
"Then give me your copy of it. Give it to me and never 
tell that I have it." 
Of course he did. And she lifted his head from her lap, 
laughing, and then leaned over him kissing and leading him 
on. When they had gone there and back (again), she sum-moned 
the carriage and driver and they drove down the 
mountain. Outside Redact House, as she expected, Nodonn 
and Culluket the King's Interrogator were waiting. 
"He's asleep," she told him. "The only other copies of 
the survey are in the possession of Ogmol and the Thagdal— 
and stored in the computer, of course." 
"Ogmol can wait," Nodonn said to his younger brother. 
"And the King has his own reasons for keeping the matter 
secret. But he will seek the life of this man, this unsuspecting 
witness for the prosecution. You must keep him safe until 
the culmination of the Combat, Redactive Brother. He is vital 
to our cause. See that he is kept happy and unaware." 
The Interrogator nodded. "I understand fully, Brother Bat-tlemaster. 

Our company cannot fail to be impressed when 
the human cancer affirms its own existence." He smiled at 
Mercy. 
Two red-and-white-clad attendants appeared and lifted the 
unconscious anthropologist from the caleche. Nodonn mounted 
and took the place next to his wife.."Until later, then, Brother. We two will go to Creation 
House and see to the computer ourselves." 
Culluket inclined his head. "Until later." He turned to lead 
the way into the caves deep within the mountain and the men 
carrying Bryan followed after..10 
NAKED AND WEEPING, THE SILVER-TORC GIRL CAME RUNNING from the King's chamber. "Oh, dear," said 
Nontusvel, casting a significant glance at 
the Master of the Royal Bed. "Not again." "It wasn't my fault, I swear, Queen and Mother!" the 
girl 
wailed. "I did everything! Everything!" She fell on her knees. The Master of the Royal Bed 
gestured and a gray-torc valet 
came up to wrap the shivering love-gift manquee in a robe of white satin. 
"Get her out of here," the Queen ordered. "I'll see to His 
Majesty myself tonight." The Master bowed. He and the servant hurried away with the sniffling 
girl. Nontusvel extinguished all the lights except 
one candelabrum of pink jewels. This she lifted on high and carried to the tall door embossed with 
the golden bearded mask. 
It swung open before her. 
"My King, it is I," she said. "Be of good cheer." 
Only a few scattered gleams, like ruby and gold embers, lit 
the bedchamber of Thagdal the High King. There was an odd sound, a little like a gulping sob, and 
then a noise of someone 
blowing his nose. 
"N-Nonnie?" 
"Yes, dear." 
The King sat on the edge of the bed, his mighty shoulders hunched, head down. "Failed again. The 
sword undrawn, the 
bow unloosed, the mightiest champion of them all laid low and humiliated. I'm done for, Nonnie. 
Finished. Not even that 
damned Lalage and all her tricks could conjure up a glimmer." 
"It is all in your mind, beloved. You've been worrying too much.".She set the candelabrum down on 
the bedside table and 
stood before him, magnificent and comforting in a flowing 
peignoir of peach color trimmed in gold. Her flaming hair hung 
down, her arms opened wide, welcoming as her mothermind 
with its invitation: Rest in me. 
She drew him up and they went out onto the balcony. It 
was very late. The moon was old, an ochreous sickle near the 
horizon, giving an unhealthy tinge of brass to the lagoon. 
"You must not be down-hearted," the Queen said. "What 
has changed? Are the Foe yonder on the salt any more confident 
of victory than they've been in years past? Hardly. We are 
strong and we will crush them, as always." 
"It's not that." 
"Aiken Drum, then? A clownish gadfly? Mayvar is senile 
and it is high time dear Riganone took her place as Lady 
Farsensor and Kingmaker. The boy knows quite well he would 
have no chance against the Battlemaster. Has Aiken Drum 
issued any format challenge for the manifestation of powers? 
Of course not! And he won't challenge by Melee Rules at the 
Combat, either. Nodonn will remain your heir—patient and 
loyal as always. And soon you'll recover your good spirits and 
your vigor as well." 
The King shook his head. "It's not Aiken Drum. Two new 
things. I—I didn't tell you." 
"Will you tell me now?" 

"Brede has emerged from the room without doors. I may 
not have the operant woman, Elizabeth." 
The Queen's screens shot up to conceal her elation. "The 
mating scheme with her is then—" 
"Brede has placed Elizabeth's genes under the strongest 
taboo. The Shipspouse claims that the woman's destiny has 
been revealed to her. That it's not in accord with the scheme 
Gomnol and I favored. I haven't told Gomnol yet, either. I 
was afraid to! Can you imagine that? My genes plus Elizabeth's 
were going to engender a new superrace under Gomnol's guid-ance. 
And now she's taboo and I'm—I'm—" 
"Gomnol's vision is undoubtedly flawed," said the Queen 
with some sharpness. "He is only a human being, for all his 
coercive power. And an aging one. Only a few years more, 
and Imidol will be deposing him." 
The King's thought was perceptible even under the screen: 
another patient and loyal son of yours? 
"Now, Thaggy," she chided, slipping an arm around his.massive waist. His belly muscles contracted 
and he straightened 
his shoulders. One or two static sparks danced in his hair and 
beard. 
"Never mind about Elizabeth," Nontusvel said. "She is 
beautiful and I can understand your disappointment. But that 
kind of woman isn't your type, vein of my heart. A Grand 
Master metapsychic! How too off-putting! I don't suppose Brede 
said what would be done with her?" 
"She wouldn't tell me. Said it would be obvious after the 
Grand Combat. Bloody two-faced enigma! What can you ex-pect 
from a female who marries a damn intergalactic worm?" 
The Queen giggled and pressed next to his naked torso. 
"And then another blow this afternoon," he muttered. 
"Not Rosmar?" 
"Of course not. That creative lout of an Ogmol! Come inside 
and I'll show you." 
They returned to the bedchamber. The king kicked aside 
the rug, then used his PK to manipulate the lock of a floor-safe. 
A small greenish plaque floated up into the Queen's 
waiting hands. She pressed the SLOW activator in the upper 
righthand corner and studied the glowing pages as they rolled 
across the plastic. Now and then she stopped the flow to study 
a chart or graph. 
"Skip to the end," the King said. "The conclusion." 
She pressed the upper lefthand corner and the pages spun 
quickly. Then a touch from the REVERSE and she had it. "Oh, 
dear!" 
"Exactly! How's that for an unwitting scenario of doom? 
That besotted idiot of an anthropologist didn't realize the im-plication. 
But Oggy did—and he nearly wet his pants begging 
me to believe that it wouldn't happen. That he and the other 
hybrids and the torced humans would remain loyal." 
The Queen whispered, "All you need do is extrapolate the 
trends a bit farther than Bryan has already done." 
"And add the focusing factor he doesn't yet know about— 
the iron. I'll wager my right nut that hybrids are immune to it 
just like humans. Does that suggest anything to you?" 
"Dear Tana, not that! Can nothing be done to stop it? Our 
beautiful Exile world! Ours!" 
She threw herself into his arms and wept. The King held her 
in a mighty grip. His eyes had begun to shine in the dark. The 
tendrils of his sparkling beard stirred, and something else. 
"We'll stop any human-hybrid coalition before it's ever born..That thing of Bryan's is only a 

scientific survey, not an oracle. 
But it's a danger to me in a way I hadn't anticipated. Dammit, 
Nonnie—I'd hoped to calm Nodonn's fears about humanity. 
That's why I commissioned the survey in the first place—to 
prove that the advent of humans was beneficial to us, not a 
racial menace as Nodonn maintained. I mean, common sense 
showed we'd made marvelous strides since the opening of the 
timegate. Technical progress as well as genetic. The anthro-pologist 
was supposed to confirm what Gomnol and I had been 
saying all along. And instead—" 
"Dearest husband, Nodonn only wants the best for our Many-Colored 
Land. He doesn't mean to threaten you." 
The King grunted. "This survey can be used to prove all of 
his doomsaying is justified. It's a clear contradiction of my 
stated policy. It may seem far-fetched to you now, but this 
little book could be the death warrant of every human and 
hybrid in the High Kingdom—and if they go, so does the 
economy of my realm! It's back to the wilderness strongholds 
for us Tanu, my lass." 
Nontusvel raised her tear-bright eyes. "You said yourself 
that the survey isn't an oracle. None of these dreadful contin-gencies 
need happen at all. You won't let them." 
"I won't!" he vowed. "Our Many-Colored Land will not be 
taken over by Lowlives! I'll see to it! And I'll accomplish my 
purpose without any of the damn draconian measures Nodonn 
advocates. There must be a way that Tanu and humanity can 
continue to prosper together—and I'm going to find it. I have 
said it!" 
"Thaggy—?" the Queen ventured breathlessly. 
"Come here, woman!" he bellowed. 
When dawn came and both of them were drowsy and at 
peace, she murmured to him, "You see? Everything's perfectly 
all right. It was all in your mind." 
"Mm-mm," the King agreed. He raised one of her hands 
and kissed each dimpled knuckle. 
"As to your problem with the silvers... I think you simply 
need a change. These silly human strumpets with their meager 
little duglets are not in tune with your present mood of high 
seriousness. You require an entirely different type of conso-lation. 
A gentler, more reassuring sort." 
The King said sleepily, "Remember that chubby black-haired 
one who sang the Welsh lullaby? I liked her. I kept expecting 
her to be sent around, but she never came."."The very thing," Nontusvel agreed. "I'll make it my 
per-sonal 
business to find out what's happened to her. If Dionket 
thinks he can keep her for himself—why, Nodonn and Culluket 
will simply point out a few realities to him!" She smiled at her 
half-dozing Lord. 
"Good old girl," Thagdal said. He let her hand fall. His 
eyes were closed. "And I'll gather up all copies of Bryan's 
report and have them destroyed, and Gomnol can take care of 
the anthropologist as well. Too bad about Oggy, though... He 
was a good..." 
"Sleep, my King." The Queen drew the silken sheet up to 
cover them both. "Sleep for now." 
Eusebio Gomez-Nolan leaned back in his Victorian armchair 
and blew three slow smoke rings. They floated across the desk 
toward the person sitting opposite, turned solid, and fell to the 
pseudo-Oriental rug with soft thuds. 
"Hope you don't mind, Lord Coercer," said Aiken Drum. 
"Can't stand tobacco." 

Gomnol made a gracious gesture. His cigar extinguished 
itself and he placed it in the onyx ashtray. "My boy, events in 
this Cloud-Cuckoo-Land of ours have taken some engrossing 
turns of late. I believe it's time that you and I had a long chat." 
"I thought you'd never ask." 
"I've revised my earlier opinion of you considerably during 
the past week or two. Mayvar has been most eloquent in your 
behalf. And so has Bunone Warteacher, whom you impressed 
no end on the Delbaeth Quest. Both of these ladies feel that 
you will be a formidable contender in the upcoming games. 
They were also fervent in their praise of your—uh—non-mar-tial arts as well." 
grin was wicked. He lounged back in his seat with 
one leg draped over the chair-arm and studied the fingernails 
of one hand. "So what else is new?" 
"I might mention," Gomnol said smoothly, "a rumored dis-ability 
of our Awful King, provoked—so it's said—by inti-mations 
of mortality as much as by the collapse of my late 
genetic scheme." 
"Brede screwed you, eh?" The little man snickered. "Now 
I get it. The old sinking ship syndrome. With poor old Thaggy 
cast as Titanic and you as Chief Rat." 
The Lord Coercer's guffaw was entirely good-humored. 
"You are going to require a great deal of help, my boy. I'm.prepared to offer it. All I ask is 
that you think over my prop-osition 
carefully." He took a fresh cigar from the humidor and 
twirled it between his fingers. "We are, I believe, approaching 
a pivotal point in the history of this Exile world. The Finiah 
attack was only the overture. And if there is a power struggle in the offing, doesn't it make 
sense for all of us humans to 
stick together?" 
He took a clipper from the drawer and operated deftly on 
the cigar. Then he tossed the silvery little gadget to Aiken 
Drum, still smiling. 
Aiken caught the cigar clipper and Gomnol's unspoken 
thought simultaneously. He peered at the thing and saw letters incised in the metal: SOLINGEN—INOX 
STEEL..11 
GERT CAME BACK TO THE PASSENGER COMPARTMENT LOOKING grim. "Hansi thinks we'll be into the next 
batch of bad rapids 
soon. You'd better put the skipper back together again." 
Amerie was bent over a supine figure. "We're working on 
him now. Five minutes." Chief Burke held one arm and Felice 
the other. Uwe and Basil were ready to grab the legs. "Here 
we go," the nun said. She applied the stimulant to the uncon-scious 
boatman's temple, then got another injection ready. The 
little monitor taped to the man's forehead began to change 
color in all of its four quadrants. 
Blood-rimmed hazel eyes snapped open. From the puffy 
lips came a croak. "Gawd... ah, Gawd!" And then he screamed, 
a sound of bitter hopelessness and physical agony. His body 
contracted in a superhuman heave that had the four restrainers 
using all their strength to keep him pinned to the deck. 
Ahh! Wotinell yer bleedin' sods done? Wotcher done? Yer 
tookit orf, y'filfy buggerin' baboons! Thass wotcher did. Iss 
gone! Gone..." 
Tears poured down the stubbly seams of his cheeks. The 
boatman howled like an animal as Amerie watched the forehead 
monitor, white with anger at what they were having to do. The 
thin grizzle-haired man's once natty green tunic was now stained 
with vomit and blood and dust from the ordeals he had endured 
under his kidnappers. Around his tanned throat was a band of 
pale flesh where the gray torc had been. 

They had been on the river two days and this was the sixth 
time they had brought the boatman around. Gert and Hansi 
could handle the boat on the smooth stretches of the Rhone; 
but in rough water they had to have the skipper's help—and 
every time they woke him, the screaming was worse. Only a.few of the de-torced Finiah prisoners 
had displayed withdrawal symptoms as severe as this man's, and those people had been 
heavily sedated during the earliest, most painful part of the 
separation. 
But the Rhone boatman could not remain asleep. "For God's sake," Chief Burke said, "hit the poor 
meshugeh with the trank!" 
Amerie said, "He has to absorb the first injection properly. 
Do you want him to crash on us? He's on the brink now. Just 
look at that vital-signs monitor... Felice! Go into his mind!" 
The cries thinned into a gurgle. The nun turned her patient's 
head so that he could cough up thin bile. Felice's eyes dimmed 
and sweat started out on her brow. The boatman's frenzy began 
to diminish under the drug and the pressure of the girl's coercive 
power. The colors of the forehead monitor shifted again. 
"Good," Amerie said. She slapped on the tranquilizer, then 
carefully administered the blend of euphoric and energizer. The skipper seemed to relax. 
"Come out of him when you think the medications have 
taken hold," the nun told Felice. "Jeez, what a balls-up." The athlete let go of the limp arm 
she had been clutching. Burke and Basil hauled the groggy 
boatman to his feet. 
Uwe said quietly, "Will he last? How's he look inside, babe?" "All I can do is coerce the guy," 
Felice said. "I'm no good at redact. This man needs a top-stem refit and I'm not capable. 
I think he navigates now by the seat of his pants. If he's not 
totally insane, he's next door to it." 
"Rapids ahead!" 
Vanda-Jo sang out from her lookout position on the extended 
mast, where she clung to a squirrel-climb apparatus installed 
by Basil. Khalid came limping to assist her down. The two of 
them dismantled the climbing gear and locked the plass roof 
panels of the boat back into place. The mast sank into its 
housing. 
"Don't stand there!" Chief Burke told them. "Everybody 
buckle in and be damned sure all the seals are tight. Come on, 
Felice." They dragged the skipper into the wheelhouse. Hansi slipped 
out of the captain's seat and the barely revived boatman was 
fastened in. Webbing from one of Basil's alpine slings served 
to strap Felice to a smaller pilot's chair.."I'm all right," Felice cried. "Get back to your 
seats, quick! 
I can handle this bird. And I think I can just about hold the 
boat with my PK now, in the straight stretches." 
The others ran aft. A great roaring filled the air, reverber-ating 
from steep canyon walls that rose sheer at least 600 meters 
on either side of them. Even though it was only early afternoon, 
dusk filled the misted slot where the Rhone boiled along in 
ever-accelerating flow. The vessel tilted forward. Black boul-ders 
with collars of fountaining spray went past in a blur... 
Listen to me Harry listen to me Harry you are going to drive 
your boat just like you always do drive it along safe and sound 
between the rocks Harry through the rapids just like you always 
do safe and sound do you hear me Harry drive the boat you're 
a good skipper Harry you're the best this is nothing to a white-water 
ace like you Harry bring her through safe and sound do 
it Harry do i t ... 
The red eyes of the boatman narrowed. He spun the wheel 
to starboard and the craft heeled around a looming obstruction, 
raced toward the canyon wall, then corrected at the last moment 
to pass through an opening spill between two colossal standing 

waves that looked like yellow whalebacks. The boat zigzagged 
through a churning welter of rock and foam, shot around a 
curve and headed for a wider section of the canyon where the 
water seemed oddly calm—until at the last moment Felice saw 
that the flood poured over an abrupt shelf into misty opacity. 
She let panic rule her for an instant before she caught sight of 
the safe bypass channel that was hidden in the cloud and spume— 
—but by then it was too late. Harry had escaped her grip. 
The boat went over the lip of the falls, turning end over end 
until it landed spang on its roof panels and seemed to buckle 
amidships like some great broken trampoline. The skipper named 
Harry was now laughing in hysteria. But there was no time to 
do anything to him, with the rest of them back there yelling 
and cursing and hanging in their harnesses upside down in the 
dark bubbling yellow gut. 
It took every bit of her psychokinetic power to turn them 
back over, so tenacious was the grip of the cavitating surge in 
the undercut rock below the cascade. But finally she hauled 
them free of it. They flew along on the river's surface again, 
and she tried to catch Harry and put him back in control— 
—but oh, God, there ahead it stood! And there was no way 
they could maneuver in time not to hit it! And—spung! The 
pneumatic craft caromed off a great jagged monolith with water.shooting in through one broken 
panel while they held a fifty- degree bank around a sharp curve in the Rhone. 
At last the boat wallowed into straight and level motion. 
The waters slowed, flattened, opened out two kilometers wide 
in the midst of a valley with brown steppe hills. 
The boatman was still giggling. Felice tore off her straps, 
lurched to him, and slapped him with a fury that nearly sent 
him unconscious again. 
"You stupid fuckard!" 
The man's subvocal thought defied her through pain and 
maniacal triumph: You were afraid ha ha afraid monstercunt 
and I gotcher! 
Aloud, he groaned and spat blood from his bitten tongue. 
Hansi and Gert came staggering in to take over the helm. "Ah, shit, she breached," Hansi 
exclaimed, spotting the 
broken panel. 
"We can fix it," his partner said. "There's a tool kit and 
spare plass underdeck. All we have to do is demount the broken 
piece." 
Gert took the wheel while Felice and Hansi supported the limp body of Harry. "What happened, 
Felice?" Hansi inquired. 
"Guy suffer a relapse?" 
"The only relapse happened to yours truly," Felice snarled. 
"I let the bastard get away from me. He must have been waiting 
his chance all this time. And when I saw that damn dropoff 
just ahead I panicked and let my control slip. That was all he 
needed. He took us over the falls on purpose." 
Hansi said, "No real harm done. No use kicking yourself 
for being scared. These cataracts would make Genghis Khan 
holler for his mommy." 
Chief Burke, his ruddy complexion faded to gray, reeled 
up and clung to the frame of the wheelhouse door. "That was 
a bitchcatawampus, Felice." 
"We broke a panel," she said. "We'll have to moor some-place 
for repairs. And figure out how to keep the Ancient 
Mariner, here, from committing suicide and taking us along." 
"So that was it." The Native American and Felice dragged 
Harry to the passenger compartment and dumped him without 
ceremony onto the deck. The exhausted girl dropped into a seat 

and closed her eyes. Harry drooled and cursed until Burke and 
Basil tied and gagged him. 
The boat steered toward a heavy stand of willows on the 
left bank. They came into a quiet backwater where curving.branches of great trees made a cave of 
green luminosity. There was a tiny sandy beach. 
"That was a bad one," Uwe observed. "I thought the boat 
was going to fold over on us like an omelet." 
"Felice lost control of Harry," Chief Burke said. 
Her brown eyes went wide and she jumped to her feet. "I 
was distracted! All right—I was scared! Old Fearless Felice 
lets the bad vibes get to her at long last. So what are you going 
to do about it, Red Man? Try me in your kangaroo court?" 
Amerie came and put a hand on Felice's shoulder. "Peo 
isn't blaming you. The boatman was docile enough on the other 
runs. You couldn't know he'd try something on this one. Your 
nerves are ravelled after shooting rapids all day, and it's a 
wonder you did as well as you did." 
Felice looked mollified. "I was able to turn the bloody boat 
rightside up again, anyhow. My PK's coming on fast. But the 
damned coercive function gets tangled up in my emotions too 
easily. We really miscalculated when we took old Harry's torc 
off. The Tanu have the right idea with their pleasure-pain cir-cuits. 
I could have had him biddable as a baa-lamb in the torc, 
and he wouldn't be cold-turkeying all over us, either." 
"Day before yesterday you said you couldn't hack it," Khalid 
reminded her. "And what if he'd let loose a telepathic warning 
to any golds or silvers in range? Don't forget that the Great 
South Road is somewhere up on the west bank. There are Tanu 
caravans up there—and Tanu on the river, and silvers at the 
plantations. Quit kicking yourself." 
Vanda-Jo peered at the jungly bank. "Do you think it's safe 
to camp here?" 
"It better be," said Hansi, coming from the wheelhouse. "I 
don't want to go one klom farther until Gert and I give this 
tub a complete checkup. God knows what else we broke when 
we came slamming down." He began removing the roof panels 
preparatory to mooring. 
Ducks fled as they nosed in. "I might pot us a few waterfowl 
for supper," Basil suggested. "We didn't," he added with a 
rueful chuckle, "retain much lunch." 
"We can all use rest and food," Amerie said. "Then to-morrow 
we'll be in good shape for—whatever lies ahead. And 
what does, by the way?" 
Khalid said, "If we've passed six big rapids, then only one 
stands between us and Lac Provencal. I haven't been on it, but.it's said to be the longest and 
worst of all—the Donzere-Mondragon 
stretch." 
"Kaleidoscopic," groaned Felice. 
"After that there's only the Glissade into the Med Basin. I 
did ride that when I was taken to Muriah. It's steep but not 
difficult. Only needs a steady hand at the tiller. Gert and Hansi 
can handle it easily. But we'll have to depend on this boatman's 
skill one last time tomorrow." 
They all looked down at Harry. His hair stuck up in dia-bolical 
spikes. His eyes bulged and he strained and grunted 
against the gag. 
Amerie sighed and reached for her medical kit. "Poor Harry." 
"Poor us," Felice retorted. 
A half kilometer downstream from the grove of willows 
where the boat was moored was a jumble of large rocks, over-grown 
with tamarisk and acacia, that protruded out from the 

shoreline and made an excellent lookout. They decided to keep 
watch there, at least until late evening, to be sure that no other 
boats happened upon their hiding place. 
Amerie's turn came when the sun had been down for an 
hour and it had become cool. She was glad of the chance to 
get away from the others—especially the wretched boatman, 
whose vital signs had stabilized under renewed sedation and a 
veinfeed. She made her orisons under brightening stars. A few 
insects shrilled and the Rhone burbled beneath the riverside 
rocks. Little herons squawked in the shallows while chasing 
their supper. 
Across the broad waters the hills were dark. There must be 
plantations in this likely valley, Amerie thought. But no lights 
were visible from her vantage point. No boats came by during 
her watch, either. Night traffic was normally nonexistent on 
the river. Still, there was the small chance that the nonarrival 
of their skipper at his usual stops would be noted by his fel-lows— 
hence the watch. Burke and the others had not made 
too great a point of it, but it was obvious that the farther 
downriver they progressed, the greater the suspicions of the 
other rivermen might become when good old Harry failed to 
appear at some accustomed rendezvous. All of the craft on the 
Rhone were distinctive; Harry's, although of a common express 
design, had a spruce-green band around its silver hull and its 
name. Walloping Windowblind, painted in large letters on bow 
and stern. They had debated disguising the boat. But in the.beginning they hoped that its owner 
would be cooperative, 
enabling them to bluff their way clear down to Muriah. Now, 
of course, it was too late to do anything but press on. When 
they passed other boats, they tooted greetings on the airhorn, 
hoping that the absence of a telepathic hail between skippers 
wouldn't be remarked during the busy Truce season... 
There was a small sound among the lower rocks. 
"It's only me." Felice clambered up to the high perch. "I'll 
take the last trick." 
"Not a soul on the river that I've seen. Only birds. All in 
order back in camp?" 
"Your patient's fine, if that's what you mean. The boat's 
back in good shape, and Gert and Hansi have gone off into the 
bushes to celebrate. VJ was in a generous mood, too, but only Uwe took her up. And I think that 
was mostly sweet charity 
on the old puffer's part." 
She plopped down cross-legged beside the nun, who did 
not comment on the badinage. "Nice night, isn't it? The weather 
in this Pliocene world is pyrotechnic! I suppose they must have 
a rainy season in winter, but it couldn't be lovelier now. Prob-ably 
why the exotics have their Grand Combat this time of 
year. Perfect weather for a war." 
The nun did not reply. 
Felice said, "There'll be a lot of fighting, once we've hit 
the torc works and closed the time-gate. Those Tanu slavers 
are going to get what's coming to them now that we've got 
their number with the iron. I have other ideas, too, that I haven't 
discussed yet with the others... Like, maybe forming a coa-lition 
with any of the silvers who'd be loyal to humanity instead 
of the Tanu. Elizabeth could sort them out for us and we could 
re-torc them with stolen gold and have a human elite corps 
ready to counter any mass Hunt the exotics might mount. Hu-man 
metas versus exotic metas! We could take over the whole 
corpuscular kingdom!" 
Amerie was still silent. 

Felice came closer. "You don't approve. It's not your Chris-tian 
ethic. You think we should try to gain our freedom by 
some kind of negotiation. Sweet reason and brotherly 
love!... Why have you been avoiding me, Amerie? Have you 
decided I'm a monster, too, like the others?" 
The nun turned. In the starlight her face was kind. "I know 
just what brand of bullshit you're getting ready to serve up, 
Felice. Please don't. I've tried to explain to you how it is with.me. I know you have your needs 
and you've been frustrated 
by missing the Finiah fight and driven half-bats by the poor 
boatman. But you can't use me to relieve your tensions. Not 
through cruelty, or through sex either. I have a right to my 
own commitment. I don't expect you to understand it, but 
you're damn well going to respect it." 
Felice's laugh was uncertain. She sat very still, her tanned 
face contrasting with the halo of pale hair. "So much," she 
said, "for the brotherly-love pitch. Thanks for nothing, Sister. 
For a while there, I thought you cared." 
The nun rounded on her and grabbed the slender bare shoul-ders. 
"You impossible child! Of course I love you. Why do 
you think I came?" 
"Then, why? Why?" Felice's voice rose to a wail. For an 
instant, her coercive power stabbed out. The nun jerked away 
with a cry of pain. Felice exclaimed, "I'm sorry, Amerie! I'm 
sorry! I won't do it again. Don't look at me—don't think at 
me like that." The bright head sank. "Never ever. Either one 
of us. Why? Why is it so wrong to find a little happiness and 
warmth? We might be dead tomorrow and that'll be the end 
of it." 
"Felice, I don't believe that. Whether we live or die, I don't 
believe that's the end. That's one of the reasons for my re-nunciation." 
"Your religious mumbo jumbo! Who can prove there's a 
God out there? Or if there is, who can prove he cares—that 
he's not some game-playing horror? You can't prove it! You're 
an educated woman, a doctor. You know there's no proof!" 
"Only in human psychology. In our need. In our instinct 
reaching out. In our very odd veneration for the love that gives 
without taking." 
"I need your love! You won't give it to me! You lie when 
you say you love me!" 
"I have to be true to myself, too. To love myself, Claude 
called it. I had to come to the Pliocene to discover that I was 
worth loving. And you.. .dear Felice. You've never learned 
to love at all. Not in human ways. Your need is different and— 
terrible. My kind of love can't satisfy you and what you call 
love would be an injustice to me. I want to help you, but I 
don't know how. All I can do is pray for you." 
"Wonderful!" The girl's laugh was rich with scorn. "Go 
ahead, then! Let's hear how you pray for poor damned inhuman 
Felice!".Amerie reached out, took the resisting girl in her arms. The 
chant was soft in the night. 
"Lord, how great is your constant care. We find protection 
under the shadow of your wings and are filled with the good 
things you give us. You have let us drink from the river of 
your kindness, for you are the fountain of life. In your light 
we will find light of our own." 
Felice cried out, "Oh—shit!" 
She wept and Amerie rocked her. After a long time, the 
girl pushed away and wiped her face. 
"Tomorrow... it's going to be tough. I was scared out of 
my mind this afternoon and I'm going to be even more scared 

tomorrow. If I let that damned Harry get away from me again, 
we're all going to be drowned or dashed to pieces. And I might 
not hold him. I—my confidence is going. And that's fatal when 
you're playing mind-games. If you're afraid that you might 
fail, then the whole thing comes apart and—what am I going 
to do?" 
"I'll keep praying." 
"Fuck your nonexistent God! If he knows everything, he 
ought to help us without our asking! Or are we supposed to 
grovel? Is that what he needs?" 
"It's good for us to reach out to him. To will his help in 
getting things that we need." 
"So your God is a psychologist! And praying is just me-tapsychic 
focusing, so that if you have enough faith you move 
the bloody mountain! Who needs a God at all if we end up 
answering our own prayers? I should pray to myself, then— 
right? But I don't believe in me, either!" 
"Felice, I don't want to bandy semantics or theology with 
you. If the word 'pray' seems ridiculous to you, forget it. Just 
keep the psychic validity behind the concept. Tomorrow, try 
to reach out and demand strength from the Mind of the universe, 
from the life-source. Never mind whether it's aware of you or 
not, who it is or what it is. You have a right to share in its 
strength—not just for your sake but for the sake of all the rest 
of us who are depending on you." 
The girl said slowly, "I think I could do that. I can believe 
in Mind. I can f e e l ... that much is real. I'll try, Amerie." 
The nun rose to her feet, lifting Felice with her. She kissed 
the girl on the forehead, then looked beyond, across the river 
to the hills black against a purpled western sky. "Felice— 
there's something over there.".The girl turned. On the far shore was a manifestation like a 
glittering string of beads moving in and out of the trees. 
"The Hunt," said Felice. 
They watched it in silence. It was moving southward through 
the bottomland that lay between the Rhone and the Great South 
Road. 
"I can farsense them a bit," Felice said. "They're out of a 
place called Sayzorask down beyond the gorge at the head of 
a big lake. They're looking for us." 
Amerie started to say, "You mean the overdue skipper—" 
"They're looking for us. Fortunately, none of them can fly, 
and they don't have any hot-dog farsensors, so they aren't 
aware that I'm eavesdropping on their mental yammerings. 
Strictly a collection of provincials. But the big boys will be 
waiting for us farther south." 
"How could they know?" Amerie said. 
"Somebody told them," Felice said. "And I think I know 
who." 
They left the moorage as soon as it was light, while the yellow water was still mostly buried in 
cotton wool fogbanks. 
The air cleared when they came into the next deep gorge, and 
they saw that they were not alone on the river; three other craft 
were lined up at the top of the chute, waiting for a little more 
daylight before daring the twenty-kilometer stretch of rough 
water. 
"Bad news!" Gert sang out. 
"Pass 'em!" Felice decided. "Peo, Basil, get that zombie 
up here. No sense trying to play tricks. Those other boats can't 
do a thing once we're in the rapids." 
The noise of the cascading turbulence made it almost im-possible 
for them to hear one another. When Harry, blue-lipped 

and feebly snarling, was strapped into place, Felice gave the 
other men a shove aft. "If we spring a leak, get everybody out 
of the harnesses and do the best you can." 
They passed the anchored boats at a distance of twenty-five 
meters. Felice forced Harry to wave and worked the airhorn 
herself, toodly-toot-toot. And then they were into the rapids ... 
Take us through Harry do your job Harry do it and I'll get 
you another gray torc do you hear me another one just as good 
as the one we took only do your job Harry steer steer dodge 
and draw and race through the booming froth and the haystack 
bulges above the underwater rocks O go Harry good old boy.stay off the knifeledge and the 
monstrous eddy whirling at the bend and the crazy tall waves filling the air with blobs of foam 
go on Harry go boy go and set her over broadside working the 
multiple rudders like organ pedals and twirling the wheel vir- tuoso Harry remember the new torc 
the old ecstasy just as good 
as before look out for the sluice and skim her on down Harry braving the violent Rhone all clogged 
with landslides and rock piles that should hold back the waters but never will come on I'm helping 
you Harry holding you and see not scared O no kaboom! sheesh all right Harry just a bouncer good 
recovery God there's a big mother big as a house in the middle of the 
channel right or left you know which is best Harry Harry Harry 
O you asshole get us out of this spin you Harry or I'll squeeze you until you Harry get us out 
Harry stop the spin I'll hurt you 
Jesus Jesus we're going to hit again Harry Harry you rotten swine I won't let you you can't do it 
I won't let you you can't 
I won't let you— 
Die. 
Felice screamed. The mind within her grasp went incan- descent in a last surge of opposing rage. 
And then, ever so 
easily, it slipped away from her and went off along a way she dared not follow. Alone, she 
returned to the chaos of the 
riverboat caught in the treacherous white eddy, rotating just 
downstream from a great craggy mass that parted the Rhone into two thundering streams. The boat 
spun faster and faster. 
With every other revolution it whanged against an underwater obstruction, the impact causing the 
strong inflated hull to vi-brate 
like a beaten drum. Harry hung in his harness, seeming to wink at her. The 
vital-signs monitor on his forehead was solid black. Felice worked the quick-release fasteners and 
let the body 
fall to the deck. She took the skipper's place, grasped the wheel, tramped the rudder pedals, and 
sent her PK below the hull to 
lift. 
Ah, so hard so heavy so hard... trying to tear loose from 
the grip of the spinning water! But I am strong (do you all 
hear?) and you can make me stronger so do it! U p ... u p ... help me lift it up. All you lives 
loves you must help you will. Up! 
UP!... And the two-in-one hears and helps and the many-in- All as well because it is not only for 
me and the drumbeats 
stop and the scratching hiss of the muddy gravely water stops and the whirling the rocking the 
buffeting all countermovement 
stops..I lift. We float. 
I am able to hold us (thank you) even pull us higher now. 
Faster and faster until we fly! And the frustrated water writhes 
underneath and the amazed canyon walls lean over to get a 
better view of the magic. 
Ahead of us the walls fall away. Water jets out in a great 
round plume, creamy as rich milk. It arches down and down 
and down, so far into the vapor that clothes the great hidden 
lake. The terminal gush of the Rhone is swallowed below us 
without a trace. 
We soar! High above the mist-country, we soar safe in 
sunlight. Our enemies are stifled and blind below and the hap-piness 

is so great that I burn—I burn for joy. 
Amerie and the Indian Chief come at last into the wheel-house 
and warm themselves at my fire. And then they put 
hands on me to still the shuddering and say, "Take us down, 
child." 
And I descend. Softly..12 
"YOU ARE CERTAIN, MOTHER?" NODONN ASKED. 
The Queen replied, "You will see for yourself. The Thagdal 
finished with her only a short time ago and sent her back to 
Redact House. Culluket got the truth from her when I farspoke 
him of what had happened. He is bringing her to the palace 
again for our scrutiny." 
They were in the Queen's morning room. She was still en 
deshabille, while the Battlemaster, summoned from the arena, 
wore a light practice cuirass with vambrace and pauldron for 
his unshielded right arm and shoulder. 
"A new human conspiracy!" he mused aloud. "The audacity 
of the Lowlives almost passes belief. That Guderian woman is 
at the bottom of it, of course. The human-Firvulag entente, the 
use of the holy Spear... and now this!" 
Nontusvel said, "It was a vengeance-thought that the girl 
Gwen-Minivel let slip, you see, when the Thagdal was filling 
her full of his grace. The gist of it was, 'You won't be able 
to do this to human women much longer when we destroy your 
torc factory and shut the time-gate. We will free all human 
slaves.'" 
"It was fortunate that you were within range and caught her 
thought." 
"It was heavily screened. But I am the Mother of the Host." 
"Exactly who is she, that she should have had knowledge 
of this plot?" 
"Alas—a most promising young healer. She was reserved 
from the customary bidding by Dionket himself. She should 
have been sent to the King's couch long ago. But for reasons 
that are not yet clear to me—you will want to investigate this— 
she was secreted in the catacombs of Redact House by the.connivance of Mayvar and the Lord Healer. 
With your Awful 
Father in such low spirits over recent melancholy events, I 
bethought me of this girl as a potential source of comfort. She 
had stunned the entire company at the bidding banquet with 
her empathy. I—I confess that I saw in her reminders of my 
own self as a young maiden, lulling my dolls to sleep and 
dreaming of the babies I would some day bear... But enough 
of that. As it is my duty to assure the consolation of our King, 
I charged your brother Culluket to discover what had become 
of Minivel. A royal command superseded even Dionket's au-thority 
over the girl and she was duly produced. Culluket is 
much too forthright to deal with the mental preparations that 
Minivel required—your Awful Father being in the delicate 
condition he is, we could not risk her putting him down—and 
so I undertook the coercion and redaction of the young woman 
myself. I worked with her all yesterday afternoon, and she 
went to the Thagdal last night as eagerly as a nymph. He never 
knew that she despised him. And of course your Father never 
heard Minivel's deep avowal of revenge, since he was dis-tracted 
by his own passion. I had her sing for him and vouchsafe 
the most maternal forms of solace in addition to the usual. She 
was a great success." 
"And all unwitting," Nodonn now suggested, "she may be-come 
the key to our victory as well." 
The door to the suite opened. The King's Interrogator, hand-some 

and stern in a hooded cape of dark burgundy, pushed 
Sukey in ahead of him and motioned for the escort of garnet-armored 
guardsmen to remain outside. Culluket saluted Non-tusvel 
and his brother. 
"Awful Mother! Brother Battlemaster! I've questioned the 
woman Gwen-Minivel and laid bare all that she knows." 
Sukey stood with a resolute face. Her eyes and nose were 
reddened from weeping and her hair hung in strings. She still 
wore the diaphanous love-gift robes the Queen's attendants had 
dressed her in the night before. 
Nontusvel and Nodonn studied the intelligence that Cullu-ket's 
mind displayed to them. 
"Child, child," mourned the Queen. "Not only the treason— 
but a human lover as well! A lowly gray—Stein Oleson, man-atarms 
to Aiken Drum. And you have conceived his child!" 
"Stein is my husband," Sukey said. 
The Interrogator, so like and so unlike his gentle mother, 
pushed back his hood. "The penalty for that action alone would.be death, Gwen-Minivel. Death for 
you, for your unborn child, 
and for the father of the misbegotten. You have abased your 
silver torc and forfeited all claim to Tanu kinship. You are no 
longer Gwen-Minivel but merely Sue-Gwen Davies, an outlaw 
human. You and any persons who are accessories to this treason 
or to the larger infamies you have revealed to me will answer 
to our justice—no matter how high their station." 
Sukey's swollen lips smiled. Her thought was clear: We 
lose our lives. But you will lose your whole world, even though 
you continue to live! 
"Send her away," said Nodonn. "We must discuss this." 
As Culluket turned Sukey over to the guards, the Queen 
said, "Let us go into the atrium where there is more air. I don't 
feel at all well." 
The Second Redactor took his mother's arm, and the three 
of them went into a little enclosed courtyard that was a bower 
of autumn roses. The Queen and Culluket sat on the marble 
coping of the central fountain. Nodonn paced the flags, his 
armor's facets throwing prismatic refractions into the garden 
shadows. 
"What have you done with the man?" Nontusvel asked. 
"There was a row, of course." Culluket's tone was dry. 
"Stein and Aiken Drum were at the Coercer College, break-fasting 
with Gomnol, if you please! Naturally the young moun-tebank 
and the Lord Coercer claimed to know nothing of Stein's 
relation with Sukey—which was the ostensible reason given 
for my taking him into custody. Stein became quite violent, 
even in spite of his torc. Gomnol had no choice but to subdue 
him and turn him over to us, however. The truth of our ac-cusation 
about the woman leaked from Stein's mind as from a 
sieve. He'll be imprisoned until the Grand Combat and set up 
in one of the gladiator events. The girl goes into the Great 
Retort, of course." 
"And Aiken Drum?" 
Culluket's laugh held admiration in spite of himself. "Now 
there's a cool one! You need no redaction to know that there 
must have been collusion between master and man in both 
treasons. But Drum insisted upon playing the innocent. He 
demanded that Gomnol and I inspect his mind together, right 
there on the spot. Without the proper softening process our 
examination had to be rough and ready—but the little wretch 
was a match for us. We couldn't discover a particle of treachery 
hidden anywhere in his mind. No knowledge of Stein and.Minivel, no knowledge of any plot against 

the torc factory or the time-gate." 
The Battlemaster stopped his pacing and sat down beside 
his brother on the edge of the fountain. He stirred the water 
with one finger. Little simmers of steam rose. "You and Gom-nol 
did the interrogation... together." 
The Queen looked from Nodonn to Culluket. "You can't 
mean—" 
But Culluket gave a slow nod. "It could very well be. Gom-nol 
is capable of it! I suspected nothing.. .Rumors of the 
King's impotence have been circulating among all members of 
the High Table, and we know our precious Lord Coercer cares 
for nothing if not the main chance. He has undoubtedly realized 
that his earlier appraisal of Aiken Drum as a metapsychic nova 
was mistaken. Furthermore, the disallowing of his genetic 
scheme featuring Elizabeth and the Thagdal has made necessary 
a slight revision in his dynastic scenario." 
"Oh, the ingrate!" cried the Queen. "Gomnol allied with 
Aiken Drum! This is what comes of admitting Lowlives to our 
High Table! We must do something about him at once! Imidol 
must issue the challenge to Gomnol at this year's manifestation 
of powers." 
"He'd lose," Culluket said flatly. 
"What then?" the Queen implored. "Gomnol will throw in 
his lot with the Lowlife rebels! Isn't it obvious?" 
Culluket looked puzzled. "But Gomnol wouldn't destroy his 
own torc factory, his power base. It's counter to the man's 
entire psychology. Somehow, Aiken Drum has managed to 
keep this part of the plot from him." 
"Then let's tell Gomnol!" cried Nontusvel. "Turn him against 
that horrid little golden beast!" 
"Peace, dearest Mother." Nodonn's sun-bright countenance 
relaxed the agitated Queen with its warmth. "There are so many 
things afoot—so many intrigues and plots and counterplots— 
that they collide with one another and entwine in a tangle that 
seems to defy unknotting. The northern insurgents with their 
iron, perhaps with the Spear; the monstrous Felice, murderer 
of our sister Epone, who now wears stolen gold; the rebel 
general Guderian and her saboteur cohorts; Aiken Drum, whose 
loyalties lie Tana-knows-where; the King's schemes; the an-thropologist 
and his survey; and the Lord Coercer—who would 
manipulate us all! A formidable snarl."."But not," Culluket insinuated, "beyond your power to unravel, 
Brother Battlemaster?" 
"I," said Nodonn, "have a Sword." 
The Queen drew in a sharp breath. "You can't!" 
"They are humans. They have outlawed themselves. Aiken 
Drum poses a peculiar problem because of his great popularity 
with our citizens. We'll need strong proof of his treason, but 
he can be dealt with. And so can Gomnol—much more easily, 
I believe. This entire mess can be turned to our advantage." 
"Are you so confident of your own ability?" Culluket asked. 
"The iron alone is a mortal threat to our survival here. If you 
should miscalculate, the entire High Kingdom could be thrown 
into chaos." 
Ever serene, the Battlemaster said, "We of the Host have 
agreed that it is necessary to return to the simpler way. To the 
old customs that we followed for nearly a thousand years. The 
superficial glamour of humanity's bastard culture has blinded 
too many of our people—even the Thagdal himself—and 
brought us to the brink of ruin. But Tana has been compas-sionate. 
It is not too late to turn back. The very conspiracies 

of these Lowlives show them up clearly as the danger we could 
only suspect before. Not even the most obtuse of our people 
will be able to ignore the human peril when I have done with 
my counteraction... And there is also this." 
He held up a pale-green plaque. Culluket exclaimed, "The 
survey! Congratulations, Brother! May I inspect it?" 
Ignoring the request, Nodonn said, "The human anthropol-ogist 
has been unwise enough to deliver an honest evaluation. 
His survey points to the inevitable ascendency of humans and 
hybrids in the Many-Colored Land, should we Tanu continue 
to exploit humans genetically and permit them to occupy po-sitions 
of power. The King has studied the survey but he still 
waffles over the implications. He and the other moral weaklings 
at the High Table may think that the status quo can be main-tained 
simply by destroying all copies of the survey and the 
computer file of data, and doing away with Bryan Grenfell and 
Ogmol. But thanks to my darling Rosmar, we have not only 
a copy of the book—but also the anthropologist himself safely 
tucked away. Dearest Mother, it is my intention to force the 
anthropologist to reveal the truth about his own human race at 
the culmination of the Grand Combat. I will produce him jus! 
prior to the Heroic Encounters so that the conspirators of the 
peace faction have no time to prepare opposition. When the.peril is made clear, the combined wrath 
of our entire Tanu 
battle-company will fall upon those who are traitors to our 
ancient ideals. Upon Gomnol! Upon Aiken Drum! And upon 
any of our other kinsmen who have become so depraved as to 
consider humanity essential to our survival here." 
The Queen raised a hand to her lips. "But then the Thag-dal— 
"
Nodonn was relentless. "Queen and Mother, if he persists in his folly, his time has come. I will 
be merciful. The choice, 
at the end, will be his own." 
Culluket hastened to say, "You, as Mother of the Host, are 
wholly exempt from his fate." 
Nontusvel had her mental screens up. Her eyes refused to 
meet those of her sons. "Sometimes... our ways are very hard. 
I thought there might be another way." 
Nodonn swept on. "As for the sabotage plot in Sue-Gwen 
Davies' mind, there are ways to turn that affair to our advantage 
if we work quickly. We have no details of the proposed assault 
on the torc factory. Obviously, the northerners did not take 
Aiken Drum and his loutish crony entirely into their confidence. 
But we do know the date—the twenty-second, two days from 
now—and we can presume that the attack will take place at 
night when activity around the Coercer Headquarters is mini-mal. 
The second part of the Lowlife plot, the attempt to send 
a message through the time-gate, must certainly take place at 
dawn on the twenty-second." 
Culluket exclaimed, "Gomnol would certainly try to stop 
the factory attack if he knew about it. We can beat him to the 
punch and take the credit ourselves!" 
The Battlemaster threw back his glorious head and laughed. 
"Redactive Brother, what a simpleton you are! But never mind. 
The planning of campaigns is my duty. You'll see how well 
I've fulfilled it soon enough. Now then... you must summon 
all of the top fighters of the Host, who have by now arrived 
in Muriah. This very noon our Mother will hold a sacred re-union 
in order to impart a special blessing on her warrior chil-dren 
before the games. When we are together and secluded, I 
will explain the strategy that will deliver all of our enemies 

into our hands." 
"The murderer of our dearest Epone," the Interrogator put 
in, "she is reserved to me." 
Nodonn nodded agreement. "Extract all useful information 
from this Felice and then it shall be as you request. But this.female monster must be able to 
fight in the gladiatorial games 
when you're through with her. It is part of my overall strategy. 
The others will go into the Great Retort. These Lowlives must 
all suffer the most public destruction, as an example to the 
others. I will brook only one exception. I have other plans for 
Guderian." 
"Both she and Felice wear the gold," cautioned Culluket. 
"Felice's will be removed by her own iron," said the Bat- tlemaster. "She will wear gray as she 
spills her blood on the 
White Silver Plain. Guderian's torc will not matter, as you will 
shortly discover." 
Nontusvel's tears had dried. She rose from the fountain's 
edge and said brightly, "If we're going to have a great crowd 
for luncheon, I must consult with the cooks at once. You will 
excuse me." They kissed her hands and she rushed away, trail-ing 
fragmented thoughts of hostessly menu planning. 
Culluket turned a level eye to the Battlemaster. "There is 
still one human whose position remains to be clarified. I must 
insist that you be straightforward in a matter of such high 
seriousness." 
The image of Mercy seemed to hover between the brothers. 
Nodonn's glowing face was unreadable and his mind as 
well. "The others of the Host were too polite to question my 
choice of consort—or too prudent. But since you dare to be 
frank, I'll tell you what I have discovered about her. From my 
first meeting with Rosmar, I was struck by the incredible af-finity, 
the sweet consonance of thought between us that was 
so different from the relationships I had known with other 
human women—even with women of our own race. And so 
after I took her to wife, I had Greg-Donnet prepare a genetic 
assay of my remarkable bride." 
"And?" 
"Mercy-Rosmar's plasm is almost identical to our own. She 
has more of our genes than she has of human. Tana alone 
knows how to account for it—but then I am no scientist." 
Culluket, who was, looked profoundly shaken. His screens 
hid a storm of intellectualizing but could not efface the tinge 
of suspicion pervading it. 
The insouciance of the Battlemaster melted into something 
black. For one terrible instant the startled Culluket was wrapped 
in a second skin all lined with needles, and the point of each 
one was the source of an electric charge that inflamed the pain 
receptors of his epidermis almost to the point of overload. He.would have fallen, would have lost 
consciousness except for 
the grip of Nodonn's great mind. 
As swiftly as it had come, the agony was wiped away, 
replaced by a sensation of utter well-being. 
And Nodonn's thought: Cogitate as you will Redactive Brother. But never again doubt my judgment or 
hint that 
MercyRosmar is anything but loyal. 
Master of every obscenity! "Now you're behaving like a simpleton again," chided the 
voice of Apollo. "Just remember who it is who will be king. 
And never make the mistake of thinking you can teach me 
anything about the inflicting of pain.".13 
TOGETHER WITH MANY OTHER SIGHTSEERS FROM MURIAH , KAT- linel the Darkeyed went down on chalikoback 
in the evening 

cool to wander over the White Silver Plain and satisfy her 
perennial curiosity about the everyday activities of the ancient 
Foe, encamped now in harmless splendor all about the north-eastern 
end of the battleground. 
She rode over the wide bridge spanning the canal. The bed 
of the watercourse was paved with limestone blocks, and it ran 
three meters deep with star-spangled fresh water. The flow 
came from that huge spring, the Well of the Sea, whose waters 
had been the rationale for the siting of the field of combat from 
the earliest coming of the Tanu to Aven. Here and there the 
Little People dipped buckets or filled skins. Farther down-stream, 
some Firvulag women were washing clothes; and still 
farther along, where the canal waters shallowed as they curved 
east and met the Great Lagoon, were the quaint bathing tents 
of the modest folk. 
Katlinel let her chaliko have its head. It ambled down the 
long central avenue of the tent-city where bonfires burned atop 
cairns of heaped rocks. The large earth-colored pavilions of 
the Firvulag nobility were here, awnings and flies fringed in 
gold and silver, and embroidered designs ornamenting walls 
and roof panels. Every Great One's tent was fronted by a tall 
pole from which floated the richly jeweled standard of its oc-cupant, 
all decorated with hair plumes and gold-plated skulls 
of vanquished foemen. Every standard was topped by the effigy 
of a different monstrous head, which represented the favorite 
illusionary aspect of the Firvulag warrior. 
The Little People were everywhere. Some wore their hand-somely 
chased obsidian armor; but most were more casually.attired in trousers and jerkins or gem-studded 
robes with borders of fur (which must have been very uncomfortable in the sultry 
dusk). Pointed caps were the most common headgear among 
men and women alike. The grander ladies had veils floating 
from theirs, or decorated padded brims, or ornamental horns, 
or long lappets that hung before or behind their ears. It was 
customary for the lofty Tanu to refer to their shadowkinfolk as 
"little." But most of those that Katlinel passed were at least 
equal to humans in stature; and now and again she caught a 
glimpse of some doughty champion who far surpassed any Tanu 
in height and bulk. It was being said in the capital that more 
Firvulag than ever before had come south for this year's Grand 
Combat, cheered by their triumph at Finiah. The army was 
rumored to include certain proud fighters who had disdained 
to contend of late because of the contamination of the games 
by human participants. Medor had come out of hiding, and the 
hideous Nukalavee who fought under the guise of a flayed 
centaur with all the raw muscles and sinews and blood vessels 
exposed to strike horror into his opponents; and even old Pallol 
One-Eye the Firvulag Battlemaster had returned, breaking his 
twenty-year sulk. 
There were supposed to be nearly 50,000 of the Little People 
encamped on the Plain already—nearly two-thirds of the entire 
Firvulag population. About half of this number were fighters, 
and they outnumbered the Tanu knights and their human aux-iliaries 
by about two to one. Eventually, almost the entire 
chivalry of the Many-Colored Land would be arrayed against 
this concentration of the Foe. 
Firvulag hawkers importuned Katlinel as she rode among 
the campfires and the jolly groups of feasters and dancers. She 
was offered jewelry and precious trinkets on every hand, since 
this was the craft that the Firvulag excelled in above all others; 
there were also vendors of sweets and salted nuts and hard 
cider and strange fortified wines. But she resisted their pleas. 

Only when she reached the end of the long avenue and circled 
around among the squat black tents of the humbler folk did 
she succumb at last to temptation in the shape of a goblinesque 
little maiden with thick blonde braids and a pert scarlet hennin, 
who offered flagons of carved myrtlewood filled with a mar-velous 
perfume distilled from forest flowers. 
"Thank you, Lady." The diminutive seller bobbed a curtsy 
as she accepted payment. "It's said among us that the Dame's.Hesperis breathes forth a scent that 
even the most reluctant 
swain finds impossible to resist." 
Katlinel laughed. "I'll remember to wear it with caution." 
"Well, I've heard," was the saucy retort, "that some of your 
Tanu gentlemen need all the help they can get." 
"We'll see about that at the games," Katlinel said, and rode 
on, smiling. 
Another chaliko fell in beside her own as she passed through 
an area crowded with dining and drinking tents. When a drun-ken 
ogre came carousing out and seized the reins of her mount, 
the rider on the other beast closed in even before she could 
spin a defensive illusion. One mental bolt sent the Firvulag oaf 
staggering into the arms of his jeering mates, who dragged him 
away with a breezy apology to Katlinel for the imposition. 
"I am in your debt, Exalted Lord," she said, bowing her 
head to her rescuer. 
He was a handsome figure, tall and broad-shouldered, wear-ing 
a close-fitting coif beneath a visored cap adorned with a 
small golden coronet. The coif hid his hair and throat and fell 
over his shoulders in a very short cape, all scalloped and jew-eled 
at the edges. His hose and doublet were deep violet. 
"It is my pleasure, Exalted Lady. I'm afraid that some of 
my countrymen take their celebrating too seriously, too far in 
advance." 
She studied him with frank surprise as they rode on together. 
"You amaze me, Lord. With your neck covered, I mistook you 
for one of my own people." 
"And which are they?" inquired the other, the faintest taunt 
in his fine voice. 
Katlinel flushed and gripped her reins, ready to spur the 
chaliko away from the upstart. But the man reached out a hand 
and the animal stood still. 
"Forgive my impertinence, Lady. It was unforgivable. But 
it is obvious that your beauty derives from human as well as 
Tanu blood. And I perceive from your silver and green gown 
that you are—as I—of the illusion-spinners, and one of rare 
power. If you will forgo your just annoyance at my crude banter 
and think instead of the small service lately done for you, 
perhaps we may yet ride on for a few moments and speak 
together. I have a great curiosity about your people." 
"And a clever tongue as well, Firvulag Lord!... Very well, 
you may ride with me for a short time. I am Katlinel, surnamed.the Darkeyed, and I sit at the High 
Table in the very lowest 
chair, being the least among the Tanu Great Ones." 
"Surely not for long!" He doffed the crowned cap; the purple coif covered his skull. "I am known 
as the ruler of Meadow 
Mountain. My domain lies far to the north, on the fringes of 
the Firvulag realm. Never before this have I attended the Grand 
Combat. My people are so occupied with the daily problems 
of survival that they have scant heart for religious games." 
"A heretical notion, to be sure. But one that I can sympathize with." 
"There are those among you who are not ardent members of the battle-company?" 
"Many," she admitted, "especially among the hybrids such as myself. But the force of tradition 

remains strong." "Ah. Tradition. But of late the old ways seem shaken. Hu-manity, 
once so docile and useful, rises up in revolt against 
your High King." 
"In alliance with you Firvulag!" "The Tanu were the first to use humans. Shouldn't we as 
well? We Firvulag are, it's true, more hidebound than you. Why—most of my people will not even 
mount an animal such 
as this, preferring to march on their own sturdy legs." 
"But you have no such scruples?" "I've been forced to be a realist, Lady. Tell me—is it true 
that human scientists are honored and fostered among the Tanu? That you've used their specialized 
knowledge to enhance your 
own technoeconomy?" "I belong to the High Faculty of the Creator Guild. Most 
science, excepting that of healing and psychobiology, falls within our province. We have many 
human scientists at work in our College, educating our young people as well as engaged 
in practical application of their knowledge. Agriculturalists, 
earth scientists, engineers of every sort, even specialists in the social sciences—all have placed 
their talents in the service of 
the Many-Colored Land." "And geneticists?" the Lord of Meadow Mountain inquired 
softly. "Most certainly." He said, "If only we were not Foes. If only we were free 
to cooperate, to have a free interchange of ideas and resources. I know that we Firvulag would 
have much to offer you. And 
y o u ... could do so much for us." 
"But that is not the way," she said.."Not yet. Not so long as the stern old battle-company rules 
your High Kingdom." 
"I must leave now," Katlinel said. 
"Will you come again and talk? There is still more than a 
week before the Combat begins and we officially become Foes 
once more." 
She held out one hand and he took it and saluted her in the 
classic manner. His lips were cold. A flash of metapsychic 
insight told Katlinel that they were also illusory. But the mind 
that opened to her in momentary hope—that was not cold at 
all. 
"I'll come again tomorrow night," she said. "Shall I ask for 
you among your friends?" 
"Few here would call me that." His smile was both rueful 
and cautionary. "Ride here and I will find you. It would be 
better if none of your people knew that you condescended to 
have converse with Sugoll, Lord of Meadow Mountain—which 
humans of Elder Earth call the Feldberg." 
"We of the High Table do as we please," said Katlinel. She 
spurred the chaliko up the trail leading from the salt plain to 
Aven..14 
GOMNOL PANNED THE INFRARED SPOT SLOWLY OVER THE 
blackness of the Catalan Gulf. "Still nothing. And the Flying 
Hunt will be moving their search into this area in another hour 
if they stick to their grid. Are you certain the saboteurs planned 
to land tonight?" 
"Goddammit, yes," growled Aiken Drum. He squatted in 
an embrasure between a pair of battlements, peering through 
an ordinary lens-ocular. He and the Lord Coercer were on the 
highest turret of Guild Headquarters. "Arrive tonight, farspeak 
me to whatever rendezvous seemed safest, confer about the 
best way to crash this place, then mount the assault during the 
wee hours Monday morning after a day's rest and recon. Don't 
dump on me if your spies were too incompetent to locate 'em." 
"I believe your friends are here already," Gomnol said. 
"They could have come in obliquely along the coast with the 
traffic from Tarasiah and Calamosk and Geroniah and the rest 
of the Spanish cities. Suppose they sailed southwest into the 
Catalan backwaters after shooting the Glissade, then simply 
doubled back along the Aven shore? If they're down on the 

coast now, we'll never spot them—and neither will Nodonn 
and the Host, airborne or not. There are half a hundred little 
creeks and inlets along this northern side of the peninsula, and 
all full of caves where they could hole up out of farsense range." 
He shut off the power of his big viewer. "You'll just have to 
wait for their hail, even if it does increase the chance that the 
Host might find them first. What a pity your saboteur friends 
didn't trust you to fly out and meet them as soon as they reached 
the Basin." 
"Aw, shut up," said Aiken. "I'm trying my seekersense on 
Felice's pattern. She might not be too good at screening yet."."And then again, she might! We'll 
have to be very cautious with that one... And that great booby, Stein! If our block in 
his mind doesn't hold—if Culluket recognizes it and gets other 
redactors of the Host to join in a multiphase probe—Stein is 
going to open up! I can't risk the Host knowing my involvement 
in this affair and neither can you. We're going to have to put 
Stein out of the way." 
"Gumball, will you stop griping my ass?" Aiken's button 
eyes held a vicious glitter. "Stein's mental block will hold. 
You just try killing him or Sukey and the whole thing's off 
between us. You grab?" 
"Only too well. But I must point out the risk we're running. 
If the Host obtains firm proof of our treason, we will be declared 
outlaw humans. No rules of Truce or other precepts of the 
battle-religion will protect us. I know how powerful you've 
become—that's why I agreed to follow your leadership in this 
affair. But the massed minds of the Host are capable of annihilating 
both of us if they act in full concert under Nodonn. 
I've had forty years of experience with the Tanu and you've 
been here three months! If you won't listen to my advice, you'll 
end up with your head on a pike—for all your high metafa-culties!" 
The trickster came down from the battlement, a conciliatory 
smile making his teeth shine in the dark. "Gumball—baby! I 
told you we'd be buddies. I know I need you. Hellfire, man, 
even if you weren't Lord Coercer and the craftiest intriguer in 
the whole kingdom—you're the boy who knows the torcs. Who 
the hell wants to be king without subjects? You gotta keep 
those collars rolling out, sweetie! Jeez, I almost blew my cortex 
when old Elizabeth gave me the marvelous news about these 
turkeys coming south to sabotage your place. And they want to close the time-gate! Not only cut 
off the supply of warm 
bods, but their futuristic goodies, too! No more real Scotch for 
you and me. Sweet houghmagandy!" 
Gomnol laughed. "There's scant chance of either happening 
now. You and I and the Tanu may have our differences, but 
the valuation of the gate and the factory is hardly one of them. 
Not even Nodonn would dare go against the King and public 
opinion by treating these sabotage threats lightly." 
"But he might try to muscle in on our act," Aiken warned. 
"Just like he did with the Delbaeth Quest. He'll try to make it 
look like he's the one who sniffs out the plots and snuffs 'em, 
and we can't let him grab face from us. We've gotta catch.these human saboteurs redhanded doing 
their thing so we can 
show what loyal citizens we are." 
"It would be more prudent to take the factory saboteurs as 
soon as we discover their hideout. But your idea does have PR 
advantages. I've arranged for neutral observers—Lord Bormol 
of Roniah and the Lord of Swords—to witness our brilliant 
defense. Both of them belong to the Coercer Guild and they'll 
be able to vouch for my zeal in case that scheming hothead, 
Imidol, attempts to say later that I was in league with the 

invaders." 
"I wish I could be here to help." Aiken spoke with every 
evidence of sincerity. "But you can't fly, and one of us has to 
handle the time-gate operation personally. We can't just warn 
the castellan and hope for the best. This Madame Guderian 
isn't any dummy, the way she orchestrated Finiah. She'll have 
something sneaky planned. Probably wild diversions while she 
creeps up on the gate invisible. But with me waiting to pop 
her illusion—have no fear!" He added quietly, "Just be sure 
you do as well with Felice, Gumball." 
The Lord Coercer was replacing the protective pod over the 
infrared scanner. "I'll have my best human golds ready for her. 
Iron weapons won't do the saboteurs a bit of good against 
them." In a nonchalant manner, he asked, "What do you sup-pose 
became of the Spear and the aircraft after Finiah?" 
Aiken lifted his golden shoulders. "Haven't the faintest! 
Sure as shit the rebels would've kept on using both of 'em in 
other attacks if they were still operational. I thought Velteyn 
claimed to've shot the plane down." 
"He said he penetrated the craft with his ball lightning," 
Gomnol corrected. "But no one saw the flyer crash and no 
wreckage was ever discovered. We certainly must find out what 
happened. If the weapon and the ship are still usable, we could 
be in very serious trouble, my boy." 
"Aaah," Aiken scoffed. "If they still had a zapper and an 
aircraft, would they come down south by riverboat and try this 
lamebrain attack on your fortress?" Aiken was reasonable. And 
his mind was artistically screened. "You got nothing to worry 
about. We'll worm the whole thing outa Felice and her ragtag 
commandos and you can have your reception committee and 
observation team all primed and ready ... And save a few pris-oners 
for questioning—okay? Even if the bird and the zapper 
they used on Finiah are a terminal fewk-out, it would be awfully 
nice to know where they came from. There might be others!".The strange bedfellows eyed one another 
for a long minute. 
Neither one could detect the presence of any suspiciously 
screened chicane in the other. They were both experts. 
"Well—guess I'll do a little eyeball scan," Aiken said at 
last. "I'll get down to the shore and be ready when Felice and 
her gang give a shout." He flipped a hand at the Lord Coercer 
in farewell. 
A longtailed moth, lime-green with windowpane eyespots, 
went fluttering from the high tower, down the northern cliffs, 
and over the dunes and badlands to the shore of the 
Catalan Lagoon. 
O Aiken. Hey! That you sweets? Longtimenothink! Thought you long 
gone. 
How could you Stein/Sukey trapped Cullukettorturer? 
Elizababe misread me not! Blame me not having done 
damnedest under friggertytough chew! Sukey leaked to Queen 
re Stein so Cull pounced. Options for me: [1] Let Cull take 
Stein; [2] fight & get us both taken. Yes? Yes! Threw good 
mindblock Stein won't betray others/me. He/Sukey secure for 
now Cull thinks he knows all. Before Combat I spring pair 
detorc ship off to save lovenest + unborn Steinling happily-everafter. 
And Gomnol? 
Elizacraftybeth you know. 
AikenDrum + Gomnol = KingYou + GrandVizierHe. 
Why not? 
Permit probe implementation? 
You can't probe longdistance and I'm too busy now to come. 

What matter no trust little ConYankeeMerlin anymore? 
Not allied Mordred. 
Who he? And why you care anyhoo GrandDropoutMaster? 
Aiken don't betray ourfriends! Beware not only for theirsake 
for yours O trickster-selftricked unto the end dear Aiken don't. 
Relax Elizababeballooner. When I king all well but interfere 
not thwart not ambitions gods/superfolk lest juggernaut squish 
you grab? 
O you Aiken do what you must but woe to you because of 
what you must do. 
You oracles all alike anal pain. Keep aloof overflying like 
before whynot? You got balloon now so take off get lost! But 
let me alone nothing stops me now nothing not you not Brede.not ArchangelNodonn not old GroupGreen 
gangomine not even chocolatekryptonite by friggertydamn! 
Elizabeth? 
You gone? 
(Laughter.) 
The longtailed moth followed the call to a deep cavern on an inlet of the northern coast of Aven. 
The saboteurs, like the 
Firvulag, knew that the simplest way to escape detection by 
Tanu searchers was to hide underground. Felice guided Aiken 
to them by means of a gossamer mind-thread, tuned nicely to 
his intimate mode, which no other being could possibly farsense. 
And when the gold-clad little figure appeared with a 
silent snap on the other side of their shielded campfire, Felice 
was standing there in the looted blue-glass armor that Old Man 
Kawai had adapted to her small stature, the Spear gripped in 
one gauntleted hand—and murder in her eye. 
"You tipped 'em off!" Her coercive power closed like a 
bear-trap. 
"Me? Me?" He squirmed in her mind's clutches. She was 
stronger than he had expected. A lot stronger. He could break 
free—but was it wise to let them know how his powers had 
matured? And now what the hell had she done? A big muffer 
of a boulder plugging the cavern exit! Where had it come from, 
so silently, so soon? Goddammit, was she a creator, too—or 
had that been just a deft bit of the old PK? 
"Felice, baby, you are making one helluva booboo. Yhhh! Lay off the marbles, kid, for chrissake! I 
didn't tell 'em! Give 
me a chance to explain!" 
She relaxed her holds, both coercive and psychokinetic. A 
great cage of light-blue flame sprang up to encircle him. (Well, 
that was that. She could create.) For the first time he paid 
attention to the others standing behind Felice, disguised as 
guards and serving women. He only recognized the nun. 
"Amerie!" cried the shining youth. "Tell her she's gotta let 
me explain!" 
"Talk fast, Tricky-Pockets," Felice said. 
He seemed to bare his innocence to the gold-torc fury. Stein 
and Sukey—they were the ones who had inadvertently blown 
the gaff—not him! Since the information he gave Felice was.basically the truth (and since he was 
marvelously adept at concealing the seams that joined truth to semitruth and false-hood), 
the girl's redactive power, weakest of her five meta-functions, 
could find no fault with his recital. Still glowering, but reluctantly won over in spite of her 
deeper instincts, she 
turned off the cage of astral fire and set him free. 
Aiken whipped a snowy handkerchief from one of his pock-ets 
and wiped his sweating face. "My sweet Lord, you're a brute, Felice! Really learned how to use 
your collar in a hurry, 
didn't you?" She did not answer. 
Aiken assumed his most ingratiating air. Addressing himself 

to the others, he said, "Everything's all set, guys. We've got an inside man—a gold-torc who's 
lived here for years pre-tending 
to be loyal, just waiting for a chance to strike a really valid blow for humanity. He's going to 
deactivate the lock on 
a very small service door that hasn't been used in years. They 
used to shovel their rubbish out of the keep and right over the 
edge of the cliff, see? There's a little narrow trail giving access 
to the door but you can walk on it all right. I checked. You'll have to come onto the trail from 
above, through town. But for 
the getaway, you can rappel right down the cliff face into the old dump and hightail it into the 
badlands. A little luck and 
there'll be such a reeraw going on that you can make it back to these caves before they even know 
you're gone." 
With a magician's flourish, he hauled a large sheet of duro-film 
out of another pocket. 
"Look! I brought you a complete map! City, Guild build- ings, interior of the headquarters block 
showing your route 
from the service door to the torc-making rooms. See—this is where you are, and here's the old 
dump, and here's the Coercer 
HQ at the edge of the cliff and the door. You just come into 
town in your disguises—you look bonzo, by the way!—and lose yourselves in the greenway bushes just 
west of the Coercer 
House wall." He spread the map on the floor and most of the saboteurs 
hunched down to study it. But Felice said: 
"What about the Spear?" Aiken was offhanded. "Oh. Right. Is that it you got there? 
Big sonuvabitch, isn't it?" "If we could get it working," the girl said, "we could hit 
the Coercer headquarters from a distance. There'd be no need for a penetration at all."."I gotcha. 
Oh, absolutely. I kinda forgot all about that old 
zapper, what with our having an inside man at the skonk works 
all ready to let us walk inside." 
"Who is it?" asked the biggest of the desperados. He wore 
the blue cloak and bronze half-armor of a captal of the provin-cial 
guard. 
Aiken frowned in anxiety. "I can't tell you his name. If any 
of you got captured, there's no way you could avoid giving 
him away. And we can't let that happen. This guy is not only 
loaded with metafunctions, but he's also in a high position. A 
perfect undercover agent for later on, see? Now lemme give 
this a good think. Like I say, I'd almost forgotten about this 
Spear. A real long shot—but if I could fix it and warn our 
inside man to get out of there..." 
Felice silently handed the great glassy lance to Aiken. Chief 
Burke brought up the powerpack and its cable, which they had 
toted from Hidden Springs in a leathern chest. Aiken stroked 
the blue-laquered weapon with steady fingers, lifting the cap-lock 
to inspect the studs, hefting it into his right armpit and 
pretending to take aim at Felice's big rock plugging the en-trance. 
"Pam!" he ejaculated. A wavering little spark, the size of 
a firefly, emerged from the business end of the device and 
drifted through the air. It collided with the rock and fell into 
an impotent shower of red-glowing dust. 
"So much for refueling the zapper with my mind-power!" 
He gave them a sprightly wink. "Now let's have a look at the 
juice box." 
He jabbed and thrust at the pack's peculiar sunken fasteners 
with several of the tools that he carried in his golden suit. 
"Gonna take more than I've got here to get it open," he said. 
"Tell you what! I'll change it into a piece of straw and myself 
into a bird and take it back to my workroom. If I get it open 
and figure how to recharge it, I'll bring it back here before 
midnight tomorrow, and warn our coercer pal what's up, and 

you can blast the place to hell and gone from out in the lagoon. 
But if I give you a mind-squeak at twenty-four bells telling 
you it's no go, you carry on with the other plan. How's that 
sound?" 
His eyes flicked eagerly from face to face. 
"I think," said Felice, "that we should postpone any decision 
until you come back here with the Spear. Operational or not..And I think you should go along with 
us on the torc factory 
assault." 
"I'd like nothing better," he said earnestly. "But I'm sup-posed 
to go to this combatant's banquet at the palace. These 
folks are just sitting down at table around midnight. There's 
no way I can get out of going. I'm one of the hottest contenders 
in the light humanweight class!" 
"I don't like this," said Felice. 
"You still don't trust me." Sorrow clouded the golliwog 
face. He gestured to the map. "What else do I hafta do?" 
"You've got it all planned, haven't you?" she said archly. 
"We just follow your little red lines on the map. Time all 
picked, route all picked, getaway all set up. What would you 
say if I told you that we'd make our own penetration at our 
own time? Not on Monday at all? Just to make sure there's no 
nasty surprises waiting behind the rubbish door?" 
He flung his hands into the air. "It's your gig, babe, not 
mine. But without the zapper or my inside man opening up for 
you, you'll need one helluva can opener to break into that 
fortress. To say nothing of losing your sync with Madame's 
hit of the time-gate." 
Chief Burke said, "Felice, maybe I could go back with him." 
"And how'd you let us know if there was any funny busi-ness?" 
She was sarcastic. "Farspeak me through your broken 
gray torc?" 
"Come along yourself, then," Aiken suggested to her. 
The others burst into a storm of protest. 
At last Felice said, "We'll have to carry on with your sug-gestion 
about the Spear. But God save your ass, Aiken Drum, 
if this is one of your hookem-snivey tricks!" 
"Piffle," said the golden man. He picked up the Spear and 
its heavy pack as though they were toys and cocked his head 
in the direction of the barricading boulder. "Are you going to 
be a gentlewoman and open your little door for a lad with his 
hands full?" 
Felice crossed her sapphire-armored arms and gave a tin-kling 
laugh. "Suppose you show us how you'd do it, Fancy 
Pants." 
Aiken emitted a martyred sigh. He faced the cave entrance 
and stuck out his tongue. The mass of mineral suddenly seemed 
shot through with thousands of small holes that grew and grew 
until the huge rock was nothing but a lacy webwork. It collapsed.in another instant of its own 
weight, making a sound like 
smashing glassware. 
"Shoddy workmanship around here," observed the jester. 
He changed into a crescent-winged nightjar. Kutuk-kutuk! 
The bird gave a mocking call as it slipped out into the night, 
a straw and a lump of moss caught in its claws. 
None of the people inside the cave could see the direction 
it took: straight north, toward the mainland of Europe. 
Gumball? 
Yes Aiken. 
They bought the house and lot and the little white fence 
around it too. Exactly as we planned. They'll futz around for 

a while when I don't farspeak back tomorrow night. But then 
they'll decide some monster ate me and go ahead with their 
plan. What else can they do? Right? You be ready when they 
come in that back door. Felice is in blue armor and loaded 
with metafunctions. Be sure your boys have their heaviest screens 
up. Besides her there are six men dressed as gray guards and 
two dames got up as servants in those stripy robes. None of 
them have any mental firepower at all. They'll be easy to stop 
if you look out for the iron. 
And Felice? 
Do whatever you have to do and watch your sweet petard. 
I understand. You go now to Castle Gateway? 
On swift little wings. Plenty of time. You just have yourself 
a nice day tomorrow and be sure the welcome mat is all shook 
out and ready at midnight. Bye-bye! 
Bon voyage to you Aiken Drum. 
"I knew it! I knew it!" Felice raged. 
"It's half past midnight," Uwe said. "We must go now. It 
will take at least three hours to get into the city, even if we do 
secure mounts at the main dockyard, and more time to make 
our way along the cliff. We cannot wait any longer to hear 
from Aiken Drum." 
"It's a trap!" the girl insisted. 
Amerie urged her. "Try to make mental contact one more 
time. Try both him and Elizabeth." 
Felice's wild brown eyes fixed on some distant vista. She 
held her fingers to her golden torc. They all waited. 
The little athlete seemed to shrink smaller than ever, despite.the blaze of glass armor. "Nothing. 
Neither Aiken nor Eliza-beth. 
Nothing. We can't go. It's a trap. I know it." 
Chief Burke stood over her. "That little gold mamzer might 
have pulled a fast one at that. But there are other ways to 
explain his silence. He could be in a position where he doesn't 
dare farspeak us. Perhaps some exotics came and hauled him 
away to the party before he could get a word off. Isn't that 
possible?" 
"No! I mean—maybe." Her expression was frantic. "Oh, 
Peo—it all depends on his farspeaking skill! And I don't know 
enough about this business yet to tell whether he's capable of 
it or not. I suppose you could be right." 
"Then we're going to have to get on with it," said the Native 
American. 
"Can't we wait? Look over Guild HQ in daylight ourselves, 
the way we planned to back in the beginning? Make our own 
plan for penetration?... My PK and creativity and coerce are 
coming on strong, guys! I think I could fuzz the minds of the 
guards at that place so we could walk right in the front door. 
Hell—in this blue rig-out and with you as my loyal escort, 
I'm just another Guild member to any big guns that happen to 
saunter by. I can shield the bunch of you easily. And by God, 
I'll smear that torc factory into marmalade just as soon as I get 
into range. Not with thunderbolts! Soft and sneaky—with PK 
that just liquefies the walls! Then we can escape before anyone 
knows what's happened. But not out that door of Aiken's— 
we'll go out one of the windows on the northeastern corner of 
the building, as far away from that service door as we can get. 
It'll be easy with my PK and Basil's climbing equipment." 
Chief Burke hesitated. 
Uwe contributed his placid opinion. "If Felice is certain that 
her metafunctions are equal to the task, there's no reason why 
we can't follow her modified plan tonight. Khalid knows the 

city. We can take a completely different route from the one 
laid out by Aiken Drum. The Coercer Guild complex is huge. 
If they're waiting in ambush at this rear door, they may be 
careless elsewhere." 
Felice gave a crow of joy and kissed the graybeard. "Yes! 
As long as we don't follow that joker's blueprint, I'm ready 
to go tonight." 
"Do the rest of you agree?" Burke asked. There was a.murmur of acquiescence. "Then hoist your 
little tushies and 
get your disguises in order. We're off to the main landing stage 
to steal some horses—I mean, chalikos. If my future ancestors 
could only see me now.".15 
"WAY! WAY FOR THE EXALTED LADY PHYLLIS-MORIGEL!" THE captal sang out. The mob of barenecks and 
grays and well-dressed Firvulag 
that crowded the central square of Muriah parted minimally to 
let the mounted party pass. Even in the early hours after mid-night 
the place was a crush of commerce and amusement and 
carnival display. The Little Folk were by ancient custom night 
people; and down here in the south, where daytime tempera-tures 
in the Mediterranean Basin soared to heights that were 
barely tolerable to specially adapted humans, let alone a race 
that had evolved in cold uplands, the Firvulag were abroad 
almost exclusively between sunset and sunrise. Those who 
wished to cater to them kept a similar schedule. 
There were plenty of Tanu and gold-torc humans about as 
well—most of them, like the Lady Phyllis-Morigel and her 
train, having recently arrived in the capital and seeking lodg-ings. 
Some of the Great Ones stayed in the palace; others were 
accommodated with relations; the keenest fighters headed for 
the pavilions that had been erected on the turfed racecourse 
northwest of the city, where they could practice their martial 
specialties. But the visitors with no special accommodation 
arranged in advance usually did what the Lady Phyllis now 
did: They demanded, as was their right, the hospitality of their 
Guild. 
She and her eight attendants rode unhindered into the great 
courtyard of the Coercer complex. Hostlers took charge of their 
mounts. An urbane silver majordomo, calm in the midst of the 
hullabaloo, assigned the lady and her handmaids a suite in one 
of the dormitory mansions; the men-at-arms were directed to 
a barracks..Felice's coercive power settled without trace over the will 
of the majordomo. "We will pay our respects to the High Faculty of the Guild, such as may be up 
and about, before retiring. Coming as we do from doleful Finiah, we have need 
of fraternal support and sympathy. You will be glad to conduct 
us into headquarters personally." 
"I will be glad," the man repeated mechanically, "to conduct you into headquarters personally." 
He led them from the basement, through the gardens, and across the plaza that fronted the looming 
block of the keep. The stronghold had been hung with extra decorative lights and was a veritable 
blaze of blue and amber. None of the Tanu or 
gold-torc humans outside the building paid any heed to the new 
arrivals. Felice's mind was apparently overshadowed by grief. Her raven standard, borne by Chief 
Burke, had long streamers 
of silver and black fluttering from its finial, the Tanu symbol 
of bereavement. 
They came to the guards at the main entrance. The major-domo 
said, "This Exalted Lady will confer with the High Fac-ulty." 
The squad leader lifted his great bare sword of blue vitredur 
in formal salute. "The Exalted Lady will confer with the High Faculty." 
"We will follow you," Felice told him. "You will follow me," said the guardsman. 
The majordomo bowed and retreated. Felice and the others 
walked between ranks of blue-and-gold-armored gray-torcs who stood like empty-eyed dummies on both 

sides of the foyer. 
There were no other people in sight. The bronze of the sabo- teurs' military harness jingled 
faintly. At each step Felice took, 
the jeweled sollerets on her feet chimed on the marble floor. 
She lowered the visor of her crested sapphire helmet. The others, as if hearing her mind's 
command, loosened iron weap- ons that had been sheathed in gold-plated wooden scabbards. 
Folding compound bows appeared from under capes; two of 
the men passed spares to the "serving women," who now shed 
their outer robes to reveal half-armor worn underneath. They mounted a great staircase, with still 
no sign of Tanu or human Guild members. Felice conjured up the image of 
Aiken's map, then tried to verify their position with her farsight. 
But the effort was still beyond her and only Khalid's spatial sense kept them from getting lost in 
the maze of corridors. 
Farsensing and seeking, like creativity, were subtle things need-.ing experience; while coercion 
and PK had burgeoned within 
the gold-torced athlete like jungle plants, long starved for light 
and moisture, that suddenly achieve their rampant growth under 
tropical sun and rain. Felice could control this ushering guards-man 
with ease, just as she had blanked the minds of the thirty 
other grays they had passed since penetrating the headquarters 
building. But now— 
A bronze door opened. A Tanu woman in a gown of navy blue came into the corridor and halted at the 
sight of the proces-sion, 
giving a telepathic greeting. 
Allhail CoerciveSister from Ninelva and let me assist your 
seeking— "Peo!" Felice cried. "I can only hold her for a second!" 
The big Native American stepped forward, his face impas- sive under the bronze rim of his plumed 
kettle-helmet. He drew 
an iron shorts word, pulled the woman toward him with one 
arm as if embracing her, and sent the point of the weapon up 
behind her rib cage and into her heart. 
The guard who had been leading them stood quietly, a blue-andgold 
robot awaiting orders. 
"Did she get off a warning?" Burke asked. 
"No," said Felice. "Back inside that door with her, and then 
out of here. We've still got a way to go." 
They began to trot down the corridor, turning to right and 
left and passing through ornamental gates and doorways until 
none but Khalid retained any orientation. The lighting grew 
dimmer. There were occasional heedless squads of guards, 
whom they ignored—and finally a truly massive pair of doors 
more than ten meters high, embossed with the heraldic male 
face and flanked by six grays in full blue-glass armor. 
"This has to be it," Felice murmured. To their oblivious 
escort, she sent a coercive command: You will unbar the en-trance 
to this torc factory. 
I am unable to do this. No gray can do this. 
"Shit!" hissed the little woman. "Stand back and we'll hope 
for the best!" 
The six guards at the doorway pivoted right and left and 
marched away like jeweled mechanical dolls, followed by the 
gray who had led them in. Felice stood before the huge bronze 
valves with helmeted head thrown back and both fists clenched 
at her sides. The polished yellow metal along the juncture went 
greenish, blue, blotched purple—and then began to glow as 
the power of her psychokinetic faculty sent the molecules of.metal to vibrating, going from solid 
to molten within thirty 
slow seconds. 
The nonmetas watched it transfixed, their iron weapons 
ready. Heat from the melting bronze and its pungent smell beat 
at them, making them draw back from the small figure that 

now raised glittering blue arms and bade the ruined portal swing 
wide. 
Behind the door was darkness. Felice stepped forward, ig-noring 
the pool of still-liquid metal that smoked on the floor. 
A burst of azure fire seemed to explode in the vast black 
beyond the open door. And then another appeared, strontium-red, 
and another of violet—blazing images in human form 
almost twice the height of small Felice. There were flashes of 
green light and rosy-gold and malevolent scarlet, all hovering 
in the dark. Crowds of them. Fifty or sixty or more, all massed 
in midair with swords and shields raised but visors open so 
that the saboteurs could see the contemptuous triumph in the 
exotic eyes of Nontusvel's Host. 
"I am Imidol," thundered the voice of the blue leader. "Your 
death." 
Felice sent a three-meter ball of flame rolling at him. "Iron!" 
she shrieked. "Iron! I'll bring down the roof!" 
Four explosions rocked the corridor. The jewel-armored 
Tanu came flying out of the huge inner chamber like avenging 
angels. The invaders loosed their arrows. There were agonized 
shouts, falling meteors, lightning bolts, the deep rumble of 
falling masonry, a smell of ozone, dust, ordure, broiling meat. 
Amerie, backed against the opposite wall of the corridor 
and blinded by fumes and metallic reek, shot her arrows wildly 
at tall glowing figures. Pulses of emotional energy smashed at 
her unshielded mind. There was a metapsychic conflict going 
on as well as a physical one, but she, lucky normal, could only 
perceive its overtones. When her quiver was empty she clutched 
her short-shafted javelin in both hands, consigned her soul to 
Jesus, and got ready to die. A crash resounded as a wall came down—fortunately falling 
in toward the torc factory and not into the corridor. The meta-powered 
jewel-lamps along the walls had all gone out and the 
only light now came from the glowing armor of the Tanu, the 
bursts of astral flame, and occasional puddles of molten slag. 
The place was thick with smoke. Amerie fell to her knees and 
sought air along the floor. Things lay there—shattered blocks.of limestone, metal lamp-fittings, 
pieces of jeweled and bronze armor, and softer dark masses that glistened and oozed. 
Amerie crept slowly through smoky hell. Uwe Guldenzopf's bearded face shone momentarily in a lurid 
blaze. His head lay 
close to the wall. There was no body. 
Sobbing, still carrying her iron-tipped spear, she followed the wall. There were more detonations 
behind her and a noise 
like an avalanche. A female voice uttered awful whooping 
shrieks like a warning siren. A great glowing rose-colored form 
went soaring over her head toward the center of the tumult— then another that shone green and 
white. The mental bom-bardment 
increased. She flattened herself on the floor, beyond praying. One of her feet was completely 
numb. The corridor 
was filled with a brain-blasting throb that made her teeth and 
even her eyes respond in a harmonic of sympathetic pain. The 
fumes and fire diminished, as suddenly the whole scene re- treated to a distance. She floated 
above her body—poor thing— 
and saw that one leather boot was burned black, still smoking, and the sooty bronze of her cuirass 
backpiece had a deep in-dentation 
above the area of her kidneys. Her right arm was 
raw from elbow to wrist and there was a glimmer of white 
bone. 
"What are you waiting for, angel?" she asked testily. But she did not die. Taking up residence in 
the battered thing lying on the floor once again, she let her eyes open. She saw a short human 
figure in shining blue armor standing over 
her. 

"Well, I'm glad to see you!" she shouted, joyous in relief. "Did we win after all?" 
One jeweled gauntlet raised the blue visor. A man with a large nose and humorous eyes looked down 
at her, smiling 
with small, perfect teeth. She had never seen him before. "You did not win," said Gomnol. 
Amerie felt her damaged body rise from the floor, sustained by the Lord Coercer's psychokinetic 
power. He walked back 
into the inferno with her drifting after him like some grotesque balloon-doll. The smoke was 
pushed away before him and little 
flames extinguished themselves as he passed. A radiance streamed from Gomnol's face, illuminating 
the ruins. There 
were giant motionless forms clad in dulled glass lying here and 
there, and smaller shapes. She saw Vanda-Jo, mouth still wide in her last silent scream; Get and 
Hansi, mated in death as in 
life, were crushed beneath a stone lintel. Khalid Khan sat against.a wall looking like a parody of 
a pieta, a Tanu warrior spitted 
by an iron spear cradled in his dead arms. "Salaam aleikoum, 
bhai," she whispered, and Khalid was lost in the dark. 
"Only superficial damage to the factory itself," Gomnol 
remarked in a pleased tone. "It was stupid of me not to have 
foreseen this contingency. It's going to be a great bore having 
to express gratitude to the Host for having saved my bacon, 
especially since you people seem to have killed a number of 
them. Ah, well. No real harm done." 
A sunburst of rainbow light now shone in the murk ahead. 
Amerie heard a deafening voice intone: "Welcome, Lord Coer-cer! 
Better late then never." 
Gomnol came into the area where the bronze doors had 
been. The last rags of smoke and vapor dissipated. Dozens of 
brilliantly gleaming knights were standing about in negligent 
attitudes, leaning upon broadswords or glass lances. Chief Burke 
and Basil, burned and bloody, wrapped from ankle to neck in 
glass chain, hunched on their knees at the feet of a ruby-armored 
demigod. And Felice was there, flat on the floor, helmet off, 
eyes shut, face and neck colorless except for the soft gleaming 
of the golden torc and the shine of her hair. 
Gomnol sent Amerie floating toward the other prisoners 
and lowered her softly. To the blue titan who had addressed 
him, he said, "Our thanks to you, Brother Imidol, to Lord 
Culluket, and to all the members of your Host. A timely 
intervention, indeed. I see that the torc factory suffered no 
serious harm." 
"It is quite safe." 
"Splendid!" A small golden container at Gomnol's waist 
popped open and a cigar emerged. The Lord Coercer bit off 
the end, ignited the tobacco with psychoenergy, and blew a 
fragrant plume toward the ruined ceiling with a fine air of 
savoir-vivre. 
"My own sources of information had made me aware of a 
possible sabotage attempt tonight," he said. "Unfortunately, 
we were misled into believing that the invaders would try to 
penetrate from the rear of the keep. My forces were in ambush 
there. Lord Bormol and the Lord of Swords had kindly vol-unteered 
to watch with us. They should be here at any moment." 
Gomnol swept the massed force of the Host with a confident 
glance. "If you permit, I'll relieve you of the tedium of the 
mopping-up operation. Redactors are on their way to succor.our fallen brethren. Those who are not 
too badly injured will surely be out of the Skin in time for the Combat." 
Imidol's glaring face was as carved from rock crystal. "We 
have lost fifteen of our sacred number to the iron. They rest 
in Tana's peace, beyond the help of the Skin." 
Gomnol frowned, studying the tip of his cigar. "Terrible! 

Monstrous!" He gestured at Felice. "But I see you have avenged 
yourselves on the Lowlife woman." "She is not dead," said ruby-clad Culluket. "I have her in 
mental bondage. Our revenge will be taken in due time." 
"Aye," said all the others. "Revenge against all traitors." 
Gomnol stood stark still. Smoke from the cigar curled play-fully 
in the air currents entering through the breached ceiling. 
"This woman showed a formidable psychoenergy," said Im-idol. 
"Much greater than any of us could have anticipated," Cul-luket 
added. "She killed three of our company by her mind's 
power alone." 
"It was only with the greatest difficulty that we all combined 
and subdued her," came the concerted voices of the rose-gold 
twins, Kuhal and Fian. 
"But not," Imidol concluded, "before she had perpetrated 
one final crime—you understand that this is what we shall 
say." The Host blazed brighter and brighter. A certain insinuation 
of the Second Coercer took unmistakable form within the massed 
minds. 
"Stop!" Gomnol cried. The mightiness of his metapsychic 
power roared out to prevent them, to fend them off while 
shielding his soul from the combined stroke of forty-seven 
exotic minds focused through the hatred and jealousy of Imidol, 
son of Nontusvel and the Thagdal, who would surely be named 
Lord Coercer by acclamation once the human usurper was dead. 
"You cannot..." came the agonized gasp of Eusebio Gomez-Nolan, 
"You cannot.. .combine against a brother. Tana for-bids 
it!" No brother you but a HUMAN and a traitor and a conniver 
with the monster Aiken Drum we know it we are sure so 
die... d i e ... 
"No proof! No... proof!" Gomnol's body twisted, the spine bowed backward in tetany. He fell in his 
armor as heavily as 
if he had been turned to stone. 
Imidol cried out, "We of the Host have our proof! Proof.for the others may come later. For now you 
will seem to die 
a hero—last victim of the monster Felice—until it suits us to 
reveal the full fabric of your treachery! Die, Manipulator. Die." 
A last sound came from Gomnol's mouth. The contorted 
limbs relaxed. The face within the bizarre sapphire globe of 
his helmet went gray, then white. A skull with perfect teeth 
grinned at the Host of Nontusvel. The cigar on the floor beside 
it consumed itself in fragrant patience. 
Culluket the Interrogator placed gray torcs around the necks 
of Amerie, Chief Burke, and Basil. And then the mountain 
climber, who of the three badly wounded prisoners retained 
the most strength, was forced to take an iron blade and sever 
Felice's golden torc. 
"No gray for her?" Imidol inquired. 
"Later," the Interrogator said. "It taints the pleasure if I 
make things too easy for myself.".16 
HELPING HIMSELF TO EARLY BUGS, THE NIGHTJAR WHIPPED 
around the predawn sky. Behind the foothills of the Jura the 
sky was already pink. Mobs of herbivores down on the plateau 
were stirring. There was activity in Castle Gateway, too—but, 
maddeningly, no trace of any invisible human skulkers any-where. 
The nightjar made a futile low pass. It was a bloody nuisance 
that he hadn't been able to locate Claude and Madame yet. 
They had to be hiding underground. No doubt with Madame's 
illusion-spinning creativity reinforcing the natural psychic shield 
of the dense granite and hard-baked soil. But they'd have to 
come out to make the sortie against the time-gate. And when 
they did, he'd nab 'em. 

As yet, none of the castle personnel knew that Aiken had 
arrived. He'd flown right up the valley of the Rhone, stashed 
the Spear in the upper branches of a big old plane tree down 
on the bottoms, and winged it on up here to do the search. 
Who noticed whether or not a nightjar flew around in the 
daytime? He'd hoped to spot their hideout, turn back into him-self, 
and lead a castle search party right to the spot (tah-dah!). 
But the damned old love-birds had foiled him. Ah, well. 
It was really kind of cute, when you thought about it. Weird, 
but cute (I mean—of course they couldn't. Could they? A 
hundred and thirty-three?) It was kind of a shame they couldn't 
have been content to Darby-and-Joan it off in the Hercynian 
Forest somewhere with the munchkins instead of messing around 
in the games of the big boys. 
But there it was. No helping 'em now. But he'd zap quick 
and merciful so at least they'd be spared getting dragged down 
to the Grand Combat and distilled alive in that glass thing the.Tanu fancied for traitors. Gomnol 
had tried to convince Aiken 
that the ceremonial death of the old folks was strategically 
necessary. (He would think so.) But to hell with him! Gumball's 
sadism would have to be content with the two old heads on 
pikes. 
Aha! Activity again. The main gate of the castle was open-ing. 
Plenty of soldiers coming out, in addition to the white-garbed 
portal keepers. Just about dawn, too. 
He banked, hunched his wings to stall, and plummeted down 
to keep an eye on things. 
Above him, gray on gray-pink and outlined in mallow on 
the sunward side, was a strange cumulus cloud. Its bottom 
sagged in udderlike formations. One of the bags elongated like 
a vaporous Tanu breast as turbulence within the cloud in-creased. 
The bag stretched lower, became a dangling sleeve, 
then a miniature tornado with vortex winds spinning at several 
hundred kilometers an hour. It twisted and groped through the 
air, humming loudly. But morning winds were keening over 
the plateau and the people on the ground did not notice the new sound. They gathered formally 
about an area of bare rock. 
The nightjar did not observe the little tornado either—not 
until it vacuumed him up, spun him off with a great tangential 
toss, and landed him in a nearly dry waterhole some three 
kilometers away ... The stunned trickster regained conscious-ness 
a few minutes later and sat cursing the solicitous little 
hipparions that came to nuzzle his muddy face. 
And then his mind flinched from a far, far obliteration of 
a familiar psychic pattern; and he knew about Gomnol. By the 
time he pulled himself together and flew back to the time-gate, 
it was too late there as well. 
"Cheri, the time has come," she said. 
He stretched, yawned, smoothed his silver hair back, then 
reached out and caught her by the wrists. 
"Fou," she whispered, when she was able. 
"We both are. We make a pair—like antique bookends." 
She laughed softly, but that brought on the coughing which 
she had been at such pains to suppress. And there was blood. 
He said, "How long has this gone on? Angelique—why didn't 
you tell me?" 
"I have taken Amerie's medicines. What else was there to 
do? You would have been made anxious for nothing. Say no 
more about it! It is time to go. And soon it will not matter."."Goddammit, we'll get away!" he 
insisted, voice all raspy. 
She kept back as he removed the top course of granite rocks 

from the wall, and enough from the center of the barricade so 
that the two of them would be able to squeeze out. An under-mined 
acacia tree sagged down like a curtain in front of the 
opening. Beyond was the deep dry watercourse where she had 
first found shelter in the Pliocene Exile some four years earlier. 
It had been Claude's idea to hide in this place, not even a 
kilometer away from the time-gate area. Under cover of her 
illusion of invisibility, they had come six days earlier during 
the hours that the moon was down and burrowed into the arroyo 
wall, enlarging the hole that had already been formed by the 
roots of the scraggly tree. They had walled themselves in with 
boulders from the streambed. From time to time during the 
nights, when her metapsychic senses told them that it was safe, 
they would venture out. The hole had been enlarged into a 
chamber nearly head-high, three meters long and two deep. It 
had suited them. 
As they crept from the place for the last time, Claude heard 
her half-joking little murmur of farewell; "Adieu, petite grotte 
d'amour." 
He said, "Two old spiders in their hole, you mean. But you 
didn't devour me, ma vieille! Still—it's just as well our time 
was short." 
"It sufficed," said she, mind all asmile. "But now I think 
we have both reached the point of plus qu'il n'en f a u t ... more 
than enough." 
She handed him the amber with the message she had signed, 
then covered them both with her mental cloak. They scrambled 
up the steep wall. The surface of the savanna was fully four 
meters higher than the streambed. No one from the castle could 
have been able to farsense their hiding place, not unless there 
was a powerful metapsychic deliberately searching for them 
and alert for her illusion. They had only a short distance to 
walk and moments to wait before they fulfilled the duty they 
had set for themselves. And then, back to the hiding place, 
where they would hope for the best, should the alarm be raised... 
Last night—or rather early on this morning—they had tried 
to find out what had happened to the saboteurs. Madame had 
sent her mind's ear straining over the long kilometers that 
separated them from the Balearic Peninsula... But the distant 
mumble refused to finetune. She could not hear and dared not 
call. And so the two of them had simply prayed for their friends,.made love again, and slept. She 
muffled her coughing in the 
blankets. Her mental alarm woke them at the preselected time. As evanescent as morning wind, they 
approached the crowd 
of people near the time-portal. In the east, the sky was now 
greenish yellow and the day would be hot. (But their cave had 
been cool, and they had had plenty of water and food and the 
soft decamole couches, and so the brief days had passed without 
effort. He had told her about Gen and she had told him about 
Theo, and then they had explored one another as only the wise 
old ones can, the lucky ones who are still strong and alive to 
danger—for the adrenals hold the great secret of old lovers, 
but only for those who are brave.) 
They were almost at the gate. It was nearly time. 
... And the world around them abruptly turned black. 
Both of them cried out. The sound did not propagate. They 
seemed to stand yet on solid ground, but all around was dark-ness 
... until there came a pinprick of light that swelled to a 
sun, to a glowing face, to the face of Apollo. 
"I am Nodonn." Well, it's finished, Claude told himself. And now she'll die with the guilt. 
A voice was speaking aloud. They knew that no one heard 

it but themselves. "I know who you are and what you would 
do. I have decided there must be an end to you and your 
meddling." 
Angelique's thought was resigned: You Tanu have won this 
time. You may kill us, but others will come to shut this devil's 
gate. "They will not," said Nodonn, "because I have chosen you." The flaming mask was enormous, 
its mind-light numbing. "My 
people have never understood the great harm you did to us in 
opening this way across the aeons. They would brook no in-terference 
with it. Not even I dared to close the time-gate by 
force. But now there is another way. You will do my will and 
at the same time achieve those goals you have set for your-selves. 
The goals you have both sought ever since coming to 
this Exile. I presume you understand." 
Claude replied: We understand, all right. 
"My people will believe that you two alone are responsible 
for the closure. The supposed calamity will be more acceptable 
to them when they learn that the insurgent leader and the man 
who bombarded Finiah have been removed from the Many-Colored 
Land... But you know that I cannot coerce you into.this final deed. The torced guardians at the 
gate would detect 
my intervention. And so you will have to act freely—and 
visibly." 
She said: Yes. It will be the ultimate proof to those at the other end of the gate. Claude said: 
And I'm glad I blasted your damned slave-city! 
Maybe you think closing this time-gate will make you 
Tanu safe from any more human uprisings. You're in for a 
disappointment! Things are never going to be the same here 
again. 
The sun-bright face darkened. Nodonn's voice rolled in their 
minds. "Go back where you came from, accursed!" 
Claude said: You fool. We came from here. 
And then their human ears heard birdsong again. The true 
solar disk was breaking over the rim of the highland beyond 
the Rhone. Not a stone's throw away, a shimmering block 
hung in the air just above the square of stones where the portal 
guardians and soldiers waited. 
Their illusion of invisibility still intact, the two old people 
began to run over the dry sod. Four human time-travelers ma-terialized 
within the tau-field and were assisted to alight. 
Angelique stumbled. Claude seized her hand, shoving aside 
soldiers and bewildered timefarers. 
"Jump for it before it recycles!" 
One of the armed guards gave a shout and rushed forward, 
waving his bronze sword. Fully visible, the old man and woman 
stood side by side in midair, hands linked. The temporal field 
reversed itself and they disappeared. 
In the sky above, a nightjar shrilled its furious kutuk-kutuk- kutuk and flew away. 
Only one of the auberge clients whose trip had been so 
unexpectedly aborted was not suffering hysterics. Still holding 
his plankton net and sack of specimen bottles, he answered 
Counselor Mishima's questions warily. 
"They were just standing there, I tell you. We only saw 
them for a split second when those mirrors in the machine's 
walls cut off. And then they were skeletons! And then dust... I 
really must demand an explanation. Counselor. The brochure 
states most emphatically that there is no hazard in the journey 
through time—" One of the other counselors, kneeling in front of the gazebo, 
broke in. "Alan, come and look at this.".Mishima said, "Please go upstairs and wait with the 
others, 
Dr. Billings. I'll be with you in just a moment." 

When the man had gone the two counselors bent over the 
pile of ashy powder. There was a peculiar gold ornament half-buried 
in it, a kind of barbarian necklet. When Mishima lifted 
it, glittering flakes—all that remained of the internal com-ponents— 
sifted from small openings and mingled with the 
dust. 
"And here... oh, God." The other counselor had discovered 
the two flat pieces of amber. The writing was clearly visible 
within. "We—we'd better rush these things up to the director, 
Alan." 
Mishima sighed. "Yes. And tell that Billings chap and the 
others that they needn't wait after all." 
The twin rings carved from jet were not discovered until 
later, when the gazebo's dust was reverently swept up to be 
stored—until the investigatory panel's work should be fin-ished— 
in a durofilm sack in the auberge director's safe. 
Six million years away, in the room without doors, Elizabeth 
and Brede wept. Foreknowledge, as Elizabeth had suspected 
all along, had only made it worse. 
THE END OF PART TWO..1 
BY THE TIME OF THE GALACTIC MILIEU THE MOUNTAIN WAS 
worn away to a remnant. It rose from the Mediterranean as the 
island of Menorca, easternmost of the archipelago that had been 
called the Hesperides. Monte del Toro, not 400 meters above 
the sea, marked its greatest eminence on eroded Elder Earth. 
Most of its ancient labyrinth of caves had by then been opened 
to the sun by wearing elements or, in the case of deeper caverns, 
drowned by the encroaching sea. 
But six million years in the past, the mountain had another 
aspect. When exotic newcomers to the Balearic Peninsula first 
saw its shadowed mass with the twin crags flanking a summit 
meadow (where Bryan and Mercy would lie), they named it 
the Mount of Lugonn and Sharn—after the Tanu and Firvulag 
champions who had fought their ritual battle at the Ship's Grave. 
Later, the mountain was simply called the Mount of Heroes. 
By a rare express command of Brede, it was made the property 
of the Guild of Redactors. Their college of healing and mind-exploration 
was built on the southeastern slope overlooking Muriah and the White Silver Plain. After the Times 
of Unrest 
and the banishment of Minanonn, the very caves within the 
mountain were annexed—at first to serve as secure crypts for 
the interment of the Great Ones, and latterly for far less sacred 
purposes. 
Felice had vowed to herself that she would never cry aloud. 
Her mind's voice might rage and the Interrogator laugh; but 
somehow, through all the days, she remained steadfast and 
never uttered a sound through the jaws wedged open. She had 
willed this one thing: paralysis of her vocal cords; and they of 
all her betraying flesh had obeyed..Culluket had gone slowly, learning her, utilizing both redaction 
and coercive power, now strumming like an artist, now 
thumping with overwhelming crude malice. And if the sensory 
overload sent her into fugue, he coaxed her back with tweaks 
at the core of the brainstem to restore full-alert wakefulness 
when it was time for the next refinement to be demonstrated. 
Mental humiliation of her, he had discovered to his surprise, 
was not nearly so effective as the purely physical assaults upon 
her feminine dignity. But she was still a child, of course. A 
perverted child. She had yielded up the required information 
rather quickly (the Spear of Lugonn in the possession of Aiken 
Drum, the Ship's Grave and its trove of flying machines, the 

schemes for producing iron weapons, the fortified villages 
abuilding in the north); and the data were sent to Nodonn so 
that action could be taken following the Grand Combat. 
That had satisfied the others of the Host, leaving Culluket free to satisfy himself. 
To peel open her mind slowly, like a fruit, so that he could 
observe and then savor all of the strange humors of the alien 
murderess. Her secret horrors, the massive psychic wound from 
the loss of her golden torc (and yet that not as devastating as 
one might have expected), the monstrous metapsychic faculties 
for coercion, psychokinesis, creativity, farsensing, now walled 
up and latent like ravening beasts in squeeze-traps, never to be 
freed again. 
Taste the rage! Watch the agony deepen at the forced shar-ing. 
Flay, open to reveal the unsatisfied needs, the infant dep- rivation short-circuiting the pleasure 
and the violence pathways 
deep within the cerebellum. Delicious possibilities there! Re-alize 
them. Replay from multiple vantage points the filth, until 
even she, wretched Lowlife, understands her own vileness. 
Inhumanity proven by a nonhuman male, exquisitely skilled. 
He worked her, shock following shock, pain piled upon 
pain, her body's degradation translated into maceration of ego; 
her hatred and fear of other beings clarified as hatred and fear 
of her self. 
Leave her bereft of everything she has ever valued, waiting 
for dissolution. (Her body had to be unharmed, of course; but 
he would fulfill his promise to the Battlemaster if he delivered 
her able to fight in the Combat as a petit-mal automaton.) 
But she would not go mad. 
Piqued, he rummaged in the wreckage, trying to discover.the explanation. He almost missed it. But 
there—a minute 
spark barricaded within a stubborn shell of screening that re-sisted 
all his attempts at puncture. Diminished and encapsu-lated, 
the being that was Felice continued to abide. 
If only he could make her speak, cry out! That was the way, 
the key. He knew it! One voluntary sound and the last defense 
would fall. But she would not. After days had passed and the Combat 
was almost upon them, he dared go no further for fear of 
extinguishing life, along with that stubborn remnant of shielded 
identity. 
"Keep it, then," he said, "for what good it will do you." And after pleasuring himself with her 
one final time, he 
clamped the gray torc of slavery around her neck, released her 
jaws, and had the attendants take her away to a cell in the 
deepest of the catacombs. 
... Steinie? 
Lovelove you're awake. "Does it still hurt, Sue?" 
He knelt on the damp stone floor next to the niche with its straw-stuffed mattress and took her by 
the hand. There was 
just enough light to see her, cast by the single Tanu jewel-lamp 
set like a sad star in the high ceiling of the cell, surrounded 
by stalactites. 
"There's only a leftover ache now. I'll be all right. Lord 
Dionket said there was no permanent damage. We'll be able 
to have others later on." 
But not him Sukey not my first unbornson. "It must have 
been my fault. We shouldn't have... after we were sure you 
were pregnant." Stupidstupidselfishprickbabykiller! 
"No!" She struggled up, sitting on the edge of the stone bed 
and taking his face to kiss. "Never think it was your fault. I'm 
certain it wasn't." (And will the certainty into his mind through 
the silver torc still worn; but hide the reality. O never let him 

find that out.) "You must stop thinking about it now, love. Get 
ready for the escape! The Combat starts tomorrow. I'm sure 
that Aiken has waited until the last minute so that the Tanu 
won't bother to come after us." 
Stein growled deep in his chest. He shook his head, like a bear warding off attacking bees. 
Alarmed, Sukey perceived the 
random neural firing within his brain that signaled the onset of 
a spasm induced by his maladaptation to the gray torc. 
"Damn Aiken Drum," Stein groaned. "He said... he prom-.ised...but first you, now me...Christ, 
Sukey, my skull's 
exploding—" 
She held his head to her breast and plunged within his mind, 
as she had at ever-shorter intervals during their time in Muriah. 
Once again, she was successful in stopping the threatened con-flagration. 
But if the torc stayed on him much longer, he would 
not survive. 
"There, Steinie. There, love. I've got you. I've fixed it." 
Water dripped from the ceiling of their prison cell—regular, 
musical. The wild beating of Stein's heart slowed and his rough 
exhalations eased. He lifted his head to meet his wife's eyes. 
"You're sure that it wasn't my fault?" 
"Believe me. It wasn't. Sometimes these things just hap-pen." 
Still kneeling beside her, he sank back to rest on his heels, 
great helpless hands turned palms up, the image of a shattered 
giant. But Sukey was not deceived. She could see into his 
mind. 
If he could not blame himself, he would look elsewhere. 
Aiken Drum hoisted the heavy Spear of Lugonn easily, 
menacing the ornate chandelier in Mayvar's audience chamber 
in the Hall of Farsensors. The glassy lance shone golden, now 
that the last of the disguising blue lacquer had been cleaned 
from it. The powerpack was fully charged. 
"Take that for your yoni, witch!" he chortled, striking a 
wicked pose. 
Mayvar's smile was indulgent. "Tomorrow, my Shining 
One. Tomorrow it all begins. But there will be five days of it, 
remember. And you can use the Spear only at the very end, 
after midnight on the fifth day when the Heroic Encounters 
take place, and even then only if Nodonn decides to use the 
Sword. And if you survive to meet the Battlemaster at all—" 
"If? If?" he squealed in mock fury. "You clapped-out old 
seeress! Are you going to renege on your own Making? Do I 
have to prove myself to you again?" 
He cast down the photonic weapon with a ringing clang and 
launched himself, suddenly naked as a fish, at the scarecrow 
figure lounging on the amethyst throne. There was no one else 
in the chamber and the seat of power was quite large enough 
for two. 
"Enough.. .enough!" she wheezed, laughing until tears.trickled through the furrows of her cheeks. 
"At least let me live to share the triumph and give you your name!" 
He let her go, still feigning vexation at her apparent lack 
of confidence. Perched on purple velvet cushions with his legs 
crossed, he stuck two fingers under his golden torc and pulled. 
The metal stretched like an elastic band, then sagged as limp 
as half-pulled taffy. He began to fling the gold about, spinning 
it thinner and thinner, catching loops of it on the toes of each 
bare foot and weaving cat's cradles with the flexible filament 
that had been a golden torc. 
"So doubt me, Hag! And I'll give back this silly gift of 
yours and go my own way. Who needs you? I've got my 
quiverful of powers all honed and ready at last and I'm a match 

for any of 'em now! Bring on the Firvulag spooks! Bring on 
Thagdal and Nodonn!" 
"If you would be king, you must play by their rules," she 
said flatly. "If they suspect that you are fully operant without 
the torc they may yet combine against you. And strong as you 
have become, my Shining One, the massed minds of the battle-company 
could kill you, given the incentive." 
"The fighters are crazy about me. And the ladies think I'm 
cute!" 
"But the Host spreads rumors. They say you co-conspired 
with Gomnol and Felice's saboteurs. They say that your inept 
handling led to the closing of the time-gate. Far more ominous, 
they say that you would mate with the operant woman Elizabeth 
and engender a race of fully operant humans here in the Many-Colored 
Land." 
"Me and the Ice Lady? What a detumefying thought!" 
His smirk was as jaunty as ever, but the golden skein melted 
back into a circle, which he replaced about his neck. He began 
to put his suit of many pockets back on. "But you may have 
a point at that. A good thing Elizabeth is about ready to pack 
it in and fly. I can't understand why she's hung around this 
long. Not unless she really does give a damn about us after 
all." 
"Don't think of her." The crone patted his head. "Don't 
think of anything but the Combat. Your participation in the 
preliminaries should present no special hazard. And no one 
may challenge you in the manifestation of powers if I nominate 
you Second Farsensor. But once the High Melee begins you 
will need to muster all the bravery and cleverness and meta-psychic 
power at your command. It's not enough for you simply.to survive the fighting. You must show 
yourself an inspired 
leader and a destroyer of the Foe. Then, as the Combat draws 
to its climax, contingents from all the guilds may rally to follow 
your banner rather than that of Nodonn! Thus you will be seen 
as a valid kingly aspirant in the Heroic Encounters at the end." 
Aiken said in a wistful little voice, "You sure I can't use 
iron?" 
Mayvar cackled. "Oh, you jester.. .on the day when you 
become King of the Many-Colored Land you may do as you 
please. But never dream of using the blood-metal in this Com-bat. 
It would be said that you were allied to the Lowlives in 
the north. Why do you think I cautioned secrecy when I gave 
you the weapon to use against Delbaeth?" 
Aiken laced his fingers behind his head and rocked back 
and forth, contemplating limitless vistas. 
"When I'm king we'll change all kinds of rules. With a 
cohort of gold-torc humans armed with iron, we'll mop up the human rebels and take care of the 
Firvulag, too. But we won't 
slaughter 'em—hell, no! Now that the time-gate's closed, I'll 
have to scrounge up subjects anywhere I can. And look at all 
of the neat things the gnomies make! Fancy jewelry and chaliko 
tack and booze that's just stone faraway! Nope—I'll pacify the 
Little Folks by threatening 'em with the ultimate weapon and 
we'll have one big happy kingdom under Good King—" 
He stopped rocking. His black eyes widened and his mouth 
dropped in stunned surprise. "Oh, damn," he whispered. "May-var— 
can you hear it? It's mostly on the intimate human mode 
but enough slops over into the gray band for you to pick up if 
you spread it out and listen sharp. You grab? It's Stein." 
"Vengeance," Mayvar said. "He blames you. Incredible!" 
The golliwog youth sat stiffly on the edge of the amethyst 

throne, farsensing for all he was worth. "Still no firm conclu-sion. 
But mulling it over, the stupid o x ... How I promised to 
keep Sukey safe. But she wasn't kept safe. Ergo, my fault! 
Can you beat that for idiot logic? Sure as shit, that little broad 
is unconsciously leaking some part of the truth to him. Women! 
It'd be enough if she just hinted the miscarriage wasn't spon-taneous. 
Looks to me like there's only one thought moving 
Stein—blame it on somebody besides himself." 
Mayvar said, "You did promise no harm would come to 
Sukey. The word of a gold-torc nobleman and royal aspi-rant—" 
"What about your precious rules?" he exploded. "Play by.the rules, you said! Are you tellin' me 
now I should have gone 
against the King and Queen just to spare Sukey a little hough-magandy 
that shouldn't have done her or the kid any harm? If 
Stein wasn't such a thick-headed—" 
Mayvar had cocked her head, still farsensing. "Hear what 
his mind cries out! This is no joke, Aiken Drum." 
His tirade against her forgotten, Aiken focused again. The 
farspoken maunderings of the half-crazed Viking were mostly 
being broadcast through his torc on the uniquely human spec-trum, 
and they were so chaotic that even human listeners would 
have been unlikely to expend the effort needed to decipher 
them. But if a person were patient and lifted aside the ramblings 
and mutters and the mixed-up business about Sukey—there was something else. 
The saboteurs coming to invade the torc factory, thinking 
they would receive Aiken's help with the Spear. Aiken's cosy 
arrangement with Gomnol. 
"Oh, Christ," breathed the trickster. "His mind-block's going. 
And with Gomnol dead, my puny redact isn't going to be able 
to nail the lid back down tight enough." 
"You must act at once. If Stein's thoughts are brought to 
the attention of the Host, they will use him to prove you 
reprobate and unworthy of aspiring to the kingship. They will 
serve you as they did Gomnol." 
"God... I'll have to get both Stein and Sukey out of here 
tonight—not wait till after I'm king, like I planned." 
"It is late for that course of action." She showed him what 
the safest course would be, at the same time trembling at her 
test of him. 
"I couldn't," he told her. "Not Stein and Sukey!" 
"Alive, they will always be a threat to your sovereignty." 
"No! There's gotta be another way!" 
"You feel an obligation to them? Your honor? Your half-jesting 
promise? Your pride?" 
"Not them! Anybody else I'll zap to charcoal, but not them." 
Not the crazy dumb lovers see how they suffer because of one 
another shrunk/enlarged by the giving but what would it be 
like? Poor doomed damned saps wondered at but denied by 
the safe avoider as I avoid/deny you dying womanbodymind. 
He repeated, "Not them." 
Mayvar rose from the throne and swayed there hooded, 
looking like the calyx of some huge, unopened violet flower. 
He knew but could not see her fresh tears. "Blessed be my.Making. I knew that you were not as 
Gomnol... and there is 
another way." 
He bounded up and grabbed her by the arms. "What?" 
"Remain here and make ready for tomorrow. Trust me. I 
will see that your friends are sent out of Muriah tonight.".2 
ON THIS COMBAT EVE, EVERY TRUE MEMBER OF THE ANCIENT 
battle-company had thoughts only for the coming clash of Foes, 
the joint celebration of life and death that they believed was 

their reason for continuing existence in the Many-Colored Land. 
But there were a few who had rejected the ancient traditions, 
and these came together—even one who had not set foot in 
the capital city for five hundred years—to consider whether 
or not this year's Grand Combat might be the great turning 
point foreseen by Brede. 
To their exasperation, the Shipspouse herself would not 
attend the meeting, would not confirm or deny the possibility. 
"The Combat itself will manifest the Goddess's Will," she had 
told Dionket, "and then you will know what you must do." 
But the Lord Healer had not been satisfied with that. What did 
a mystic know of power struggles? Her vision was so discon-certingly 
long. 
And so he had summoned the leaders among the antibattle 
faction, even the pair long banished, to a secret chamber deep 
within the Mount of Heroes; and when Katlinel dared to bring 
in the two outsiders, the extraordinariness of the times excused 
it and even lent it a mad kind of suitability. 
DIONKET LORD HEALER: Greetings to you all, fellow traitors 
and peacelovers, and especially to our Psychokinetic Brother 
Minanonn Heretic, and our Coercive Brother Leyr, so long 
absent from our cabals, and our distinguished Foeman— 
SUGOLL: Ally. 
DIONKET: —now so fortuitously allied, the Lord Sugoll, ruler 
of Meadow Mountain, and greatest of those called How-.lers... Sisters and Brothers, we are indeed 
poised on the 
brink. Say, Mayvar. MAYVAR KINGMAKER: Aiken Drum is ready. The human youth 
is fully operant, possessed of all faculties save redaction in 
a truly remarkable degree. I believe no single Tanu or Fir- vulag champion will withstand him. 
Failing catastrophe or 
a mass attack by the entire battle-company—which cannot 
happen unless he is attainted unworthy according to our 
ancient code—he will become king five days hence after 
defeating both the Thagdal and Nodonn at the culmination 
of the Grand Combat. MINANONN THE HERETIC: A human ... barely more than a child. 
A trickster, if rumor does not lie! This is your pivotal figure? MAYVAR: I have tested him in all 
the ways. He is flawed— 
and who among us is not?—but he will be worthy. 
ALBERONN MINDEATER: Kid's got good stuff. Nerve. Heart. 
BUNONE WARTEACHER: Jisum! Both kinds. MAYVAR: He can be cruel, but he is capable of love all unrealizing. 
I have been true to my Making. 
LEYR THE BANISHED: But—a little human mountebank? KATLINEL THE DARKEYED: You loved a human once 
yourself, 
Father. And our races are merged, for better or for worse. MAYVAR: Aiken Drum will engender 
operants. Not so many 
as Elizabeth might with her fuller penetrance, but enough. 
GREG-DONNET GENETICS MASTER: Have no fear, kinfolk! Aik-en's 
genetic assay is colossal! I mean—compare him to Nodonn, for instance. The Battlemaster is 
gorgeous, but we 
all know how few pureblood offspring he's sired. And his 
hybrids haven't a High Table candidate or even a first-class power in the lot. 
BLEYN BATTLE-CHAMPION: Who wants to be the one to remind Nodonn of his deficiencies? (Rueful 
laughter.) 
LEYR: Well, you've seen this boy fight and I haven't. But it's hard to swallow the notion that any 
human could stand up 
to Nodonn, much less this stripling with a silly name. MAYVAR: He will receive another name, 
according to our cus-tom, 
after he survives the High Melee. 
MINANONN: Look here. Granted this Aiken Drum licks Nodonn in the Encounter—and I'm not nearly so 
sanguine as you 

seem to be on that point, Kingmaker—both the post of Lord 
Psychokinetic and the governorship of Goriah will fall va-cant 
when the boy assumes the throne..DIONKET: Exactly. And now that Sebi-Gomnol is dead, the 
Coercer Guild must also seek a new leader. 
LEYR: Almighty Tana! Is that why you got Minnie and me back 
here? 
KATLINEL: Father—surely you can best Imidol in the mani-festation 
of powers. His coercive will is much weaker than 
Gomnol's was. 
LEYR: Ye-es, but don't underestimate the enemy, Katy-girl. 
Imidol won't settle for a simple manifestation the way some-one 
like Aluteyn would. He'll want a battle-trial—minds 
and weapons—during the Melee. 
DIONKET: This is true. And you are much older than Imidol, 
Coercive Brother, and there is considerable risk. But we 
know your mind. If you were victorious and reascended to 
the High Table you would play a moderating role... no 
matter who became High King. 
LEYR: Dammit—Minnie's the peaceloving heretic, not me! 
ALBERONN: But you'd never favor the extermination of hu-manity— 
nor of us hybrids—as does the Host of Nontusvel. 
LEYR: Of course not—! 
KATLINEL: And much as you love Combat between equals, 
Father, you have scant heart for the senseless slaughter of 
the Hunt, or the perversion of the Low Melee that has come 
about since the advent of torced human fighters, or the 
unsporting tactics used against the Foe in the High Melee 
itself. 
LEYR: Bad business, those gray shock troops and the whole 
matter of mounting our fighters on chalikos. Small wonder 
the Foe sulks and makes Lowlife alliances. 
DIONKET: The Host must not be allowed to dominate the High 
Table! We appeal to you, Leyr. And to you also, Minanonn. 
MAYVAR: We stand at a crossroads, Brothers and Sisters. We 
may choose our turning or have it forced upon us. 
LEYR: Very well. Perhaps I'm getting soft-headed in my old 
age... but I'll challenge that young brawler Imidol. 
MAYVAR: And you, Minanonn? 
MINANONN: You see me allied to your cause in the event of 
Nodonn's defeat, contending against Kuhal Earthshaker for 
the leadership of the psychokinetics. 
MAYVAR: You have the power. You were Battlemaster once. 
MINANONN: Five hundred years gone, before my enlightenment. 
And you know me little, Kingmaker, if you think that I.would sacrifice my principles now to to 
become a killer 
once more. 
DIONKET: For an end to killing! 
MINANONN: Not even for that. 
MAYVAR: If the Guild presidency might be decided in a peaceful manifestation of powers and not in 
battle-trial? 
MINANONN: That will never happen under the Thagdal's regime. 
MAYVAR: But if our faction forces a change of the rules under 
a new king? 
MINANNON: Then I would willingly aspire. However, until the 
dawn of that unlikely new day, I must take leave of you, 
Sisters and Brothers. I fly back to my place of banishment 
in the wilderness. Farewell. 
(He goes.) 
BUNONE: Until we meet again, dear Brother Heretic! When our 
faction controls the Many-Colored Land and I forgo my 
war-teaching for fancy embroidery! 

ALBERONN: That you may, and pink and blue to boot, Lady, 
if you undertake further Quests with Aiken Drum. 
BUNONE: Shame on you, Creative Brother, for not considering 
the feelings of the Kingmaker. 
MAYVAR: I have no illusions about the sexual faithfulness of 
my human protege. I see him as he is. 
DIONKET: Tana help us if you do not. 
LEYR: Yes—how about that, Kingmaker? What happens if this 
trickster of yours plays his own game once we've put him 
on the throne? 
BLEYN: We can all move into Minannon's cave in the Catalan 
Wilderness. 
MAYVAR: He is worthy! I am certain of it! Under him, we will 
be able to inaugurate a new era. The only questionable factor 
was the influence of Gomnol—and he is dead. With the 
time-gate closed, we will push gradually for the emanci-pation 
of the grays, an end to involuntary human concu-binage, 
abolition of the Hunt, and peace between Tanu and 
Firvulag at last. What was impossible under the Thagdal or 
Nodonn is not only feasible but certain if Aiken Drum is 
King of the Many-Colored Land. 
SUGOLL: Let us speak of others who also share this land. GREG-DONNET: Oh, listen! This is 
marvelous—and so logical, 
from a eugenic standpoint! Positively elegant! I couldn't 
contain my enthusiasm when Katy came to me. Of course, 
she and Sugoll will be only a token of what might follow.as the old racial prejudices are broken 
down. But later— 
the results will be very similar to the injection of Aiken's 
genes insofar as ultimate improvement of the metapsychic 
phenotype— 
LEYR: What the hell is this little capon blithering about? 
KATLINEL: Sugoll and I, Father. The merging of all three gene 
pools. 
LEYR: Katy?! Do you mean to tell me that you and this—this 
Firvulag— 
KATLINEL: Howler. 
SUGOLL: My body is, of course, an illusion. Like all of my 
subjects, I am a mutant. Katy accepts me as I am. But let 
there be no masking between us, either, father-in-law elect. 
Look. 
LEYR: (!) Compassionate Tana. 
GREG-DONNET: Their children will be beautiful. Their minds, 
at any rate! And I'm off with them to the North Country 
this very night to look into the teratogenic thing and see if 
it might not respond to a little fiddling. Anyhow—monster 
is as monster does. 
LEYR: Katy.. .oh, Katy. 
DIONKET (embracing her): Blessings, Creative Daughter. And 
upon you, Lord of the Howlers. You take with you the 
flower of our High Table. Be with her a bridge. 
SUGOLL: Threefold, we may hope. Farewell. 
(He goes, with Katlinel and Greg-Donnet.) 
BUNONE: Cheer up, Leyr. At least they'll be out of this mess. 
You can work off your steam on Imidol. I rather like that 
Sugoll fellow myself. A lot of style for a Firvulag... 
MARY-DEDRA: Then we only wait? Wait for Aiken Drum to conquer? 
ALBERONN: Some of us take the active role in his cohort during 
the High Melee. There are numerous volunteers, admirers 
of his prowess, especially among the hybrids. But Aiken 
Drum will require captains following his banner as well. 
Bleyn and I have offered ourselves. 

BUNONE: And I. 
LEYR: Oh, hell. Why not? I'll throw in with him, now that the 
world's turned upside down... But there's one tradition 
they haven't dared to meddle with: warrior's privilege! How 
about it, fighters? A little practical preparation for the Grand 
Combat, hey? 
ALBERONNE + BLEYN + BUNONE: Warrior's privilege! No.noncombatants allowed! Roll out the barrels! 
(They go.) 
DIONKET: The rest of us will have other work. CREYN: And may I remind you, Lord Healer, that some 
of the 
work awaits to be accomplished yet this night. MAYVAR: You have secured it, Mary-Dedra? 
DEDRA: It is here, Lady Kingmaker, in this golden box. MAYVAR: As a human, Dedra may touch it 
without peril. Open 
and show us, child. 
DIONKET + CREYN: Ah. DEDRA: It was where Elizabeth farsensed it, hidden beneath a granite sett in 
an obscure corner of the Coercer House base-court. 
Lord Gomnol must have put it there himself long 
ago against—some contingency. No one saw me remove 
it. 
CREYN: And it is certain, Lord Healer, that this tool of the 
blood-metal may safely remove torcs from humans? DIONKET: I have it from Elizabeth, who learned it 
from Madame 
Guderian herself. Both silvers and grays have been liberated 
by means of iron in the north. As to the safety of the op-eration 
... that depends upon the individual's reaction to the withdrawal. We will give the tool to Sukey 
and hope that 
her redactive powers are sufficient. When the fugitives are 
safely away and she is certain that she need not coerce Stein for his own good, she will cut his 
torc, removing him from 
Tanu influence and mind-hearing permanently. MAYVAR: But we will give her another option, poor 
little one. 
It is the wish of our future king. 
DIONKET: I see. Gold, instead of the silver she now wears. She 
would retain her metapsychic powers and still be free, while 
her mate remains a bareneck. And she must make the choice... This putative Crown Prince of ours is 
a fiend! 
MAYVAR: It is late. Long past midnight. We must act. CREYN: I will fetch them. They will trust 
me—even Stein. 
DIONKET: Culluket is away, engaged in a premature warrior 
celebration with the Host. It will be safe. And Elizabeth is already waiting on the mountaintop. 
DEDRA: Elizabeth? MAYVAR: We have had to change the plan for the liberation of 
Stein and his wife. A boat could be too easily intercepted. And Elizabeth's hot-air balloon 
carries three. 
The hellad drawing the caleche let out a whicker of surprise.when it came to the dark summit and 
saw the huge thing moored 
there, swaying in a gentle west wind. 
"Creyn?" Elizabeth was standing next to the gondola. Her 
red jumpsuit, like the scarlet balloon, was black in the light of the waxing moon. 
"Make Stein walk, Elizabeth. I'll help Sukey." 
"I'm all right," Sukey insisted, climbing down from the 
carriage. "I just thought it would be safer if Steinie were out..." 
"I have him," Elizabeth said. "The balloon is ready. Thank 
God you're a small person, Sukey. This will be crowded, but 
we'll be all right if we keep Stein sedated while we're in the 
air." 
"Elizabeth—" Creyn's voice broke. 
"Upsy daisy, Stein. Now you, Sukey. No—don't touch that 
cable. It opens the maneuvering vent, dumps hot air that we 
need to rise." 
The tall exotic was still standing by the carriage. The hellad 
drooped in the traces. "Elizabeth!" 

"Yes, Creyn?" She came toward him, thinking he wished 
to say goodbye. 
"Brede... charged me to explain that... this was not fore-seen 
by her. Nor planned by the rest of us. Believe me! The 
cell next to Stein and Sukey... I could not help but perceive 
how little sanity was left to her, for all her uninjured body, 
and how the Combat would surely snuff it out whether or not 
she survived physically. And remembering that she had been 
your friend... I consulted Brede. She said that the choice must 
be your own." 
He lifted a blanket. Curled up on the floor of the carriage, 
frail and vulnerable as a sleeping child, lay Felice. 
He said, "You could force-feed the balloon piloting data to 
Sukey ... a few minutes' work for a Grand Master. The hazard 
for them would be very small—" 
Brede!!! 
I hear Elizabeth. 
You did this! 
It is as Creyn avers. I did not not foresee it, did not plan 
it. It is the work of the Goddess. Of God. 
No. No! Oh—damn you! All of you! 
The balloon rose, wafting unseen as the westerly breeze 
took it over the lights of Muriah. As it gained altitude above.the Great Lagoon it met a windshear. 
The semidirigible en-velope 
shuddered, caught momentarily in opposing currents. Continuing ascent injected it fully into the 
other airstream. 
It changed direction away from Corsica-Sardinia and sailed 
southwest, toward the Isthmus of Gibraltar..3 
THEY WAITED FOR DAWN. Tanu and Firvulag and torced humanity gathered in splendid 
array on the Plain, which was pearl-colored now because of 
the traditional Mist of Duat that the creators of both battle- companies had conjured as a skycanopy. 
A low droning sound, 
part growl and part minor chord, swelled on the still air. The 
commonalty of the Firvulag, standing on the sidelines all min-gled 
with the Tanu and human non-combatants, were voicing their ancient overture to the Combat. 
Firvulag warriors in obsidian armor all decked with gold 
and jewels stood in a vast mob some 20,000 strong, dwarfs 
and giants and middle-sized stalwarts all mixed together, some bearing the ghastly effigy 
standards, some clutching naked 
weapons. Their great battle-captains were massed nearest to the east-facing stage where the 
royalty of both races had as-sembled. 
On the opposite side of the marble platform waited 
the Tanu army. Disdainful of the informality of their shadow-brethren, 
they were ranged in elegant ranks according to their guilds: the violet and gold farsensors, the 
blue coercers, the 
ruby and silver combatant redactors, creators armored in beryl 
tints, and glowing rose-gold psychokinetics. Up in the front rank of the Farsensor Battalion, an 
impudent little human posed 
among towering jeweled champions. His armor of gold-lustre 
glass was adorned with amethysts and canary diamonds, and his cloak glittered uniquely black with 
a violet edge. He bore 
high his banner with its strange device. 
The light in the east brightened behind thick mist. The chain 
of silence rang. Eadone Sciencemaster came forward from the group of Most 
Exaltered Personages and raised some small instrument to her.eyes. Thagdal and Yeochee stood 
immediately behind the Dean 
of Guilds, the Tanu monarch attired in blue-white diamond 
armor, the Firvulag wearing sharply faceted black. 
"The First Day begins," Eadone declared, bowing to the 
Kings and stepping aside. 
Thagdal gestured. Nodonn Battlemaster came to salute the 

two sovereigns, trailed by gigantic Sharn-Mes the Young 
Champion—who as representative of the losers in last year's 
Combat had only a subsidiary role to play in this opening 
ceremony. Nodonn carried a glass weapon similar to the big 
two-handed swords used by both exotic races; but this Sword 
had a great flaring basket-hilt and a thin cable leading from its 
pommel to a box worn at the Battlemaster's waist. 
Glowing like an aurora, Nodonn formally offered the Sword 
to Thagdal. The King declined it with equal solemnity, saying, 
"Be thou our deputy. Open the sky to this Grand Combat." 
Nodonn turned, facing east and the veiled sun. He lifted the 
photon weapon. A brilliant emerald beam stabbed the low-hanging 
cloud deck, piercing the gray and allowing a widening 
shaft of solar radiance to spotlight its summoner, the two Kings 
and the Firvulag general standing behind him, and the rest of 
the Most Exalted Personages on the platform. Warriors and 
noncombatants together sang the Song, the soaring Tanu chorus 
counterpointed by the deeper, more sonorous voices of the 
Firvulag. The break in the clouds expanded, just as it always 
had for long thousands of years on the foggy planet Duat, where 
the ancient rivals had been accustomed to use both mental force 
and laser beams to insure a sunny sky for their annual ritual 
war. 
The Song ended. The vault of the Pliocene heavens glowed 
blue above the White Silver Plain. Fighters and spectators gave 
a mighty cheer, and the First Day of the Grand Combat began. 
Felice awoke to stillness. Physical. Mental. Emotional. 
She was half-sitting on the bottom of some cramped con-tainer, 
crushed up against the sleeping form of a disheveled 
young gold-torc woman she had never seen before. Standing 
like some herculean statue almost on top of her, but looking 
out and away, with mind a singing blank, was a man both 
gigantic and familiar. 
But he was not the hated Beloved not him. 
Human-hairy legs rising to a grubby green tunic. A waist 
cinched by an amber-studded belt. Great hunched shoulders..Hands resting on the padded top rail of 
the box. Motionless 
homely blond head. 
Above, the blazing gridiron within the mouth of a vibrant 
scarlet gut. A blue sky. 
What? Some new amusement of the tormentor? But his mind 
was no longer with her. He was gone and she remained. The 
strength had been given to her and she remained. 
The gridiron thing was of a peculiar complex design, glow-ing 
with such heat that the air for meters around it was all 
ashimmer. It was mounted at the tip of a decamole frame that 
was attached to the decamole container that imprisoned the 
three of them. There were silvery cables depending from a 
wide ring around the red maw's opening, and these were also 
attached to their open-topped cell. Beside her, projecting from 
the wall of the box, was a fat shelf. She raised herself painfully 
and saw a digital instrument cluster: 
ALT—2104.3; TER CL—2596.1; VAR—+ .19; ENV—77[green]; 
AMB AT—17.5; PO FX—37:39N, 00:33E; GD SP—66.2; HDG— 
231; F RES—2299.64HR; ZT—07:34:15 
She and Stein and the woman were in Elizabeth's balloon. 
Free. 
Felice pulled herself upright and stood beside the rigid man. 
There was absolutely no sensation of movement through the 
air, no wind. The heat generator above their heads was silent; 
but if she strained her ears she could hear minute cracklings 

as hot air swirled within the semidirigible envelope, and a tiny 
zip when a high venting panel gaped momentarily and then 
closed. Free. And her mind... 
Fingertips touched the cold gray circlet around her neck. 
She smiled. Unfastening the knob-catch, she removed the dead 
torc, held it over the rail of the gondola, let it fall into the deep 
basin of the Empty Sea. 
Now grow, small cherished thing. 
So fragile, so deceivingly meager, the kernel of her identity 
within the brain-vault opened. Psychoenergies gushed forth in 
giddy torrents. The strictures, the wounds, the debris from the 
torturer's work that seemed to presage madness (so Creyn the 
redactor had believed) were swept away. A fantastic new ed-ifice 
that was the unwitting legacy of the Beloved reared in 
glory. It expanded, it filled, it recovered and restored and.reorganized as it grew. In seconds 
only, the mental seedling 
burgeoned into a mature and executive psycho-organism. She 
was whole. She was operant. And he had done it! She was 
coercive, psychokinetic, creative, farsensing—all thanks to 
him. Willing destruction, he had engendered life. Crushing her 
to near-nothingness, he had forced her into Union (and poor 
Amerie had been right about that much, at least). 
She abode in midair and delight. Gratitude warmed her. She 
loved him more than ever and thought about how to show her 
thankfulness. Reach out? No, not yet. But later, yes. So the 
Beloved and all his kin would know what she had done, just 
before they died. The method... 
She looked over distances. There could be no return to 
Muriah, the White Silver Plain, and the Combat. She could 
deal with many of them in direct confrontation, but never with 
them all. And it would have to be all. 
Under the soaring balloon the Southern Lagoon narrowed 
toward the Long Fjord that lay south of Cartagena during the 
early Pliocene. Milky waters, dull-gleaming in early sunlight, 
had swallowed her gray torc. The alkali flats were punctuated 
by eroded volcanic necks from which jagged walls of old lava 
radiated. Where the short Spanish rivers dropped from the Betic 
Cordillera, the shores were stained with black and brown and 
vermilion alluvial fans. Receding on her right hand lay Aven. 
The Dragon Range of its midsection was still visible back in 
the haze. Somewhere on the other side of the peninsular neck 
would be the large city of Afaliah and the rich plantations of 
its dependencies. 
Were human minions even now tending herds or overseeing 
ramas who mined ores in those mountains? Would they rec-ognize 
the drifting speck of the balloon for what it was? Prob-ably 
not—but her illusion-spinning power rendered the big red 
envelope invisible, just in case. Firvulag? There would be wild 
ones in the Betic highlands who had scorned to attend the 
Combat. But they could be no threat at such a distance, and 
their powers of farspeech were so weak that they would surely 
be incapable of spreading any alarm. Tanu? None. They were 
at the Grand Combat. All of them. All gathered together on 
the salty plain deep in the Empty Sea... 
Yes, of course. 
That was how. And so fitting, like a reverse birth, with the 
amniotic flow initiating. It would not be easy, even for her as.she was now. But—yes! Stein had 
been a crust driller. He 
would know the great earth faults, the zones of instability. 
She smiled up at him. The bright-blue Viking eyes stared unseeing ahead. Every five seconds they 
slowly blinked. The 

unconscious mind of him below Elizabeth's expert restraints cycled easily, at peace. Felice could 
now admire the Grand 
Master's handiwork that had shunted to harmlessness all but 
the sustenance circuits of the gray torc. There remained certain 
grave dysfunctions within Stein's brain, but they were capable of being healed. 
And the little woman? His wife, of course. Gently, Felice 
went probing among the secret places of Sukey's sleeping mind. After a time she found the wellconcealed 
thing that would 
motivate Stein to help her engineer the murder of the Tanu 
race. The estuary below narrowed rapidly. The fjord, deep and 
blue, snaked through a region of ancient vulcanism that linked Europe with Africa. Eroded 
cindercones, ash beds, and areas 
of dark rubble made a kind of sill across this part of the Med-iterranean 
Basin. West of the fjord-pierced barrier, below the 
region that would be called the Costa del Sol by inhabitants of Elder Earth, was a sizable 
lowland; there lay the islet-studded 
Great Brackish Marsh, with its areas of open water where Bryan 
and Mercy had once anchored their yacht. Farther to the west 
the waters shoaled into playas and then blazing alkali deserts. The active volcano of Alboran 
poked up amidst barren wil- derness, smoking in a desultory fashion. Beyond was a deep 
evaporite basin; and then the abrupt southerly curve of the Betic 
Range, which joined the two continents at the narrow and 
precipitous Gibraltar Isthmus. A thin forest grew along the fjord. It looked like a lonely 
and pleasant place to stop. Scanning Sukey's mind once again, Felice perceived the 
simple maneuvers needed to land the balloon. Heat reduction 
and cutoff, vent action, her own override of the vagrant low-level 
wind currents that threatened to send the balloon into an undesirable area. There! Into a 
sheltered nook below one of 
the old volcanic cones. A spring greened level and ashy soil. The bottom of the gondola touched 
down, lifted, came securely 
to rest. Holding the envelope in position with her PK, she 
tugged the deflation cable. The apex gaped and residual hot air vomited from bellying scarlet 
fabric. A normal human would 
have seized a line and jumped out to deck the still-stiffened.envelope so that it could be secured 
or completely deflated; but the masterclass psychokinesis of Felice simply lowered the 
thing by mind-power. The touch of a stud began evacuation of 
the structural members of the envelope. Within a few minutes 
the decamole bag of the red balloon stretched tidily at one side 
of the gondola, flat and expired. 
"Wake up, everybody!" Felice cried brightly. "Breakfast 
time!" 
Bryan had been imprisoned in a comfortable suite in the 
highest level of Redactor Guild headquarters. The sleeping 
chamber was windowless, extending into the flank of the moun-tain; 
but the sitting room had a balcony that overlooked the 
southern section of Muriah and the orchards, olive groves, and 
suburban villas that extended from the city outskirts to the 
land's-end promontory where Brede's small residence stood. 
Beyond that curved the White Silver Plain. He could not see 
the Combat, of course. The ritual battlefield lay nearly three 
kilometers away and below the peninsular rim. But as the sun 
climbed there were occasional heliographic flashes from that 
direction; and now and then, when the wind shifted, he thought 
he heard distant sounds of thunder and music. 
If truth were told, Dr. Bryan Grenfell was deeply disap-pointed 
at missing the Grand Combat, even though the hand-somely 
sinister Culluket had explained that he was going to 
play a very special role later in the celebration and so had to 
remain offstage, as it were, until his time had come. But almost 
every anthropologist delights in ritual spectacle, and Bryan, 
whose specialty ordinarily kept him busy studying statistics and 

other less colorful manifestations of culture, was at heart a 
sucker for a good show. He had looked forward to this stylized 
brawl between the exotic races... but here he sat in glum 
conventry on the balcony, imbibing pale Glendessarry with the 
sun still on the wrong side of the yardarm, while almost every 
other human or exotic inhabitant of Muriah was out cheering 
the preliminary sporting events that were taking place down 
on the sparkling salt. 
She came through the locked door, found him, and laughed. 
"Mercy!" 
"Ah, your face, my darling love! That dear, astonished 
face!" She ran to him, trailing cerise and gold gossamer, and reached 
up to kiss him. Her wired and jeweled headdress was so elab-.orate that he felt he was caught with 
her inside some fantastic 
bird cage where dangling ornaments tinkled and chimed. With 
her auburn hair concealed beneath a golden hood, she looked 
unfamiliar, alien: Lady of Goriah, wife to the godlike Battle-master, 
aspirant President of Creators—all these, easily. But 
where was his lady passing by? 
"Silly juggins," she said. There was a snap and she stood 
transformed, wearing the simple long dress of the portrait he 
had carried next to his heart. 
"And is this better?" she inquired. "Now do you know me?" 
He let his arms gather her in, and it was as always (again), 
the soaring into light and the inevitable fall into darkness, from 
which he returned a little later each time. 
They sat together on a shaded divan on the balcony when 
he had recovered, and he explained to her about the picture he 
had used in searching for her, and the strange reactions of the 
people he had shown it to. They laughed over that. 
"I tried to imagine your life in the Pliocene when the com-puter 
first gave me your portrait, back in the auberge," he said. 
"You and your dog and the sheep and the strawberry plants 
and all. I visualized you in some idyllic pastorale... and I'm 
afraid there were even times when I was Daphnis and you were 
Chloe, God save the mark." 
Once more she laughed, and then kissed him. 
"But it wasn't at all like that," he said. "Was it?" 
"You really want to know." The sea-eyes were opalescent 
this day, still slightly misted from the ecstasy. When he nodded 
she told him how it had been—how the Tanu examiner at 
Castle Gateway had been astonished, then terrified at the result 
of her mental assay, throwing the entire establishment into a 
swivet. How she had been granted the unprecedented honor of 
being flown to Muriah, where the members of the High Table 
had themselves confirmed her enormous creative potential. 
"And it was decided," she said, "that after I had been filled 
with the Thagdal's grace, I would go to Lord Nodonn. He came 
to fetch me, having in his mind to make me just another of his 
human ladies. But when we met—" 
A smile of wintry satisfaction touched Bryan's lips. "En-chantress." 
"No... but he could see within my brain the differences. 
There was love, too. But Nodonn would not have made me 
his true wife because of that alone."."Of course not," Bryan said dryly, and once again she 
laughed. 
"He and I are not as romantic as you, dear Bryan!" 
Not as human, something hiding inside him twitted. 
She said, "By the time we reached his domain of Goriah 
we were pledged to each other. He took me as consort in a 
faerie wedding that seemed the fulfillment of every wonderful 
dream I'd ever had. Ah, Bryan! If you could have seen it! All 

of them dressed in rose and gold, and the flowers and the 
singing and the joy ..." 
He held her tight against his breast, looking over her head 
to the horizon where the mirror flashes were. He knew he was 
dying of her, and that it didn't matter. The elfin lover was as 
nothing, her metapsychic powers were nothing, not even her 
imminent ascension to the High Table of exotic nobility mat-tered. 
With one small portion of her heart she loved him, and 
she had promised that he could stay until the end. 
She shattered his reflection with a droll commonplace. 
"Deirdre had pups! Four of them. They're all over the palace, 
the little devils, snow-white and full of the dickens. Fortu-nately, 
we Tanu love dogs." 
He had to burst out laughing, restored to the still improbable 
here and now of a bright sunny morning, October 31, six 
million years before the time of their birth. 
"Shall I show you the games?" she asked. And then in quick 
explanation, "Ah, no, love—I can't take you to the White 
Silver Plain as yet. But I can project images of what's hap-pening 
for us to watch together. It'll be just like a glorified 
Tri-D, but with all the sensations. I needn't return to the others 
until tomorrow, when they have the manifestation of powers." 
"And you go up against Aluteyn?" 
"Yes, my dear. But I'll win over him, never fear. The poor 
man is old, more than three thousand, and tired. His time has 
come. He's as much as admitted to Nodonn that he'll welcome 
the life-offering." 
"And will the Thagdal as well?" Bryan asked her. "Aiken 
and Nodonn are bound to meet in this Combat. No matter which 
one wins, the King himself must be challenged by the victor. 
I can't believe that Nodonn would continue to defer to Thagdal 
after a victory over Aiken Drum." 
Mercy's bright gaze turned aside. "Nor would he. If my 
Lord wins—and he must win!—he will become king and re-.store the old ways. Matters have... 
progressed too far for him 
to consider any other course." 
For only a moment, the scientist in him prevailed. "Mercy, 
the old ways can't be restored. The human advent, the adul-teration 
of the exotic culture by our technology, the hybridi-zation 
of the races—it can't be reversed! Nodonn must see 
that." 
"Hush, Bryan. No more of such portentous talk!" She waved 
her hand and the distant tournament sprang to life in the thin 
air beyond the parapet. "Look! We'll watch the games together 
and between times you'll love me again and again from the 
excitement! But don't fear that your civilized sensibilities will 
be too affronted, for no people meet death in the First Day 
Events. All the wonderful violence is only for the sake of 
sport." 
"So I'm civilized, am I?" Laughing they fell back again 
onto the cushions. All around spun the preliminary contests of 
the Combat—the Tanu knightly jousts and chariot races and 
chaliko races; the ramshackle Firvulag hurling competition and 
the Little People's gnomish version of highland games; the 
Contest of Animals in which Tanu and Firvulag and gold-torc 
humans matched purely natural skills against fierce Pliocene 
beasts (and could Bryan believe his dimming eyes when he 
saw who was to be the opponent of the giant ape?); and then 
the Fray of Warrior-Maids, wherein Tanu and human gold-torc 
women contended against one another in the lists with horrific 
illusions and genuine weapons, stopping only short of ritual 

decapitation so that the losers could be restored by the Skin in 
time for the real hostilities on the day after tomorrow. 
Bryan and Mercy watched the spectacle all afternoon and 
on into the night, for no one seemed to sleep during Grand 
Combat time when the days lasted from dawn to dawn. And 
she was right about the excitement inflaming them, and when 
she rose to go he was so sated that he could not be roused. 
"Oh, you've truly found that which you searched for," she 
told him, kissing his forehead. "So you won't begrudge me 
my share of the bargain, will you? Wait until they come for 
you, dear love. And after it's over, we'll meet one final time." 
Her magnificent court costume restored, she went out through 
the locked door just as she had entered..4 AS THE LAST OF THE CHARIOT RACES ENDED, THERE WERE DEAFening 
cheers from the Tanu stands and flower garlands draped 
around the necks of the three blue-dyed chalikos; and a trophy, 
of course, and the royal accolade from the King himself. Only 
the bookies reacted to the victory with understandable ennui— 
not that the race was fixed, but what kind of odds could you 
give against the Queen? They always let her win the last one. 
"Congratulations, Nonnie," Thagdal said, kissing her as she 
alighted from the gilded wicker vehicle. "You showed 'em 
again, old girl." 
But he didn't want to watch the Tanu youngsters in their 
point-to-point, or the humans and hybrids boat-racing while 
Fian Skybreaker whistled a breeze and the noble ladies shud-dered 
delightedly at the occasional dump into the perilous chop. 
They debated for a moment whether to view the Firvulag caber-tossing 
or the sword dance—for there was always the chance 
that a careless contestant would split a gut or get a foot chopped 
off. But even these diverting possibilities had little appeal to 
the King. 
"I'd rather just go into the pavilion and take it easy for a 
while," he confessed. "I'm in a rotten mood, Nonnie." 
She led him away. Once they were secluded within the white 
silk, she wove metapsychic screens and blotted out the carnival 
hurly-burly. They served themselves lunch, for none of the 
little ramas were allowed on the White Silver Plain lest their 
sensitive minds be damaged by the emotional tempests of the 
Combat; and the gray-torc servants and barenecks, by long 
tradition, were free at this time to watch the games and indulge 
their gambling lust. 
The King did not eat much. His apprehension was so patent.that Nontusvel finally made him lie down 
on the royal camp bed so she could administer the sovereign remedy. And in the 
self-revelatory murmurings that followed, he told her all the 
bad news. About the defection of Katlinel and the Genetics 
Master, which had come to his attention just before the Opening 
of the Sky. About the message from Redact House, disclosing 
the escape of Aiken Drum's minion, Stein, together with the 
latter's ingrate paramour and Felice... and even Elizabeth. 
"There's real trouble brewing, Nonnie. These are bad times 
and the worst is yet to come. Aiken Drum denies any knowledge 
of the escapes—and would you believe it? Both Culluket and 
Imidol confirm that the little bastard's telling the truth! But if 
Aiken didn't free the prisoners, who did? And where's Eliz-abeth? 
She's not working with the healers any more. Has she 
gone off with Felice? Or is she hiding, getting ready to connive 
with Aiken Drum in the Combat?" 
"Oh, Thaggy—surely not! Elizabeth is nonagressive. Ri-ganone 
determined that when the woman first arrived here in 
Muriah." 
But the King, not listening, only raged on. "And that damn 

Katy! Look what we did for the half-human chit, raising her 
to the High Table and all! And she goes and confirms everything 
Nodonn's been saying about untrustworthy hybrids. Tana knows 
why she took Greggy with her, but there's been hanky-panky 
in the computer room." 
Nontusvel said anxiously, "You don't suppose Greggy man-aged 
to get his own copy of Bryan's survey?" 
Thagdal chewed his ornately braided mustache. "If he did, 
he'd be in a pretty position to play both ends against the middle. 
The human middle! And you know who's perched right there 
on the divider grinning at the lot of us..." 
"Greg-Donnet is too dear and simple to fall in with any of 
Aiken Drum's intrigues—even if the boy were able to muster 
a following." 
"Hah! I've had my doubts about the simplicity of Crazy 
Greggy for some time now. And Aiken is popular with our 
petty nobility, make no mistake. Did you see where he's going 
to fight the ape?" 
The Queen looked shocked, then began to giggle. "The 
gigantopithecus? Oh, Thaggy! The clever little devil. I mustn't 
miss it!" 
"Nobody wants to miss it," the King said gloomily. "That 
little joker has the crowd in the palm of his hand before he.even gets into the blood events. They 
like the runty bastard, I 
tell you! And when he really starts to put on a show with his 
damned masterclass metafunctions in the battles, they'll respect 
him as well as lionize him. He'll romp through the High Melee 
giving a good account of himself and attract enough opportun-ists 
under his banner to support him in his bid for a Heroic 
Encounter with Nodonn." 
"A few urban dilettantes and hybrids!" 
Thagdal shook his head. "He's got at least three High Table 
champions lined up already. And contingents from Roniah and 
Calamosk and Geroniah and Var-Mesk have declared for him, 
too. Mayvar's made sure all the provincial lords know about 
Aiken Drum's golden balls." 
"They'll never choose that clown over Nodonn!" 
"Face it, Nonnie. Our son the Battlemaster has metafunc-tions 
to burn and more panache than me and my Awful Father 
and my Unspeakable Grandsire all rolled up in one. But eu-genically 
speaking, he just doesn't cut the mustard. And that's 
all those hinterlanders think about: strong genes, more kids, 
population growth to keep us ahead of the Firvulag horde. 
No.. .we've got to be realistic. If Aiken survives the High, 
he'll go after Nodonn in the Encounters. And if he should win, 
the whole damn company'll accept the kid as Battlemaster by 
acclamation. Then my ass'll be on the line." 
"Nodonn will defeat Aiken Drum," the Queen declared. 
"He's your designated heir. If necessary, he can invoke ancient 
privilege and use the Sword!" 
But then Thagdal had to admit to her that Aiken had the 
Spear. For a long time after that they sat together hand in hand, 
each contemplating the end apart from the other, and finally, 
with some measure of serenity, admitting that it might be more 
bearable if shared. 
The balloon riders decided to camp on the fjord, at least 
until the next day. Felice assured Sukey that it would be im-possible 
for any hostile observer to penetrate her illusionary 
defenses. She further invited Sukey to enter her mind and 
discover something of the wonders newly wrought there. All 
that Sukey knew of the ring-hockey player had come second-hand 

from Stein. (This poor little child with the big brown eyes 
and tattered chemise—this was the ball-breaking bull dyke 
Stein knew back at the auberge?) Any misgivings Sukey might.have entertained were dispelled by the 
aura of goodwill and 
kindly power shining from Felice's mind. 
Resting for a day [thought Sukey] would give them time to 
assess one another, get cleaned up, and make rational decisions 
about where to go from here. Most especially, it would provide 
the opportunity for that delicate operation, the removal of Stein's 
torc. 
The double-level steel cutters were in one of the gondola 
lockers. "I'll be able then to complete most of his mind-healing 
myself, even with his torc off." Shyness made Sukey hesitate 
before explaining to Felice. "There are certain mental lesions 
that Elizabeth couldn't mend, you see. Very old injuries made 
worse by the torc. But their cure is not so much a matter of 
redactive skill as one o f ... love." 
Felice gave a light laugh. "Stein's a fortunate fellow! If 
you like, I'll work the cutter so you'll be free to concentrate 
on his mind. If there's a need, I can coerce him into quiet 
as well." 
Sukey nodded. The two of them bent over Stein, who lay 
with eyes wide open on the wiry turf. At the severing, the giant 
cried out. But the caregiving mind was there with her soul-mortar 
and balm, guiding his psychoenergies into the channels 
prepared by Elizabeth. There would be no serious postaddictive 
trauma for Stein. The anomalous brain-circuitry of the torc and 
all trace of its insult melted away before Sukey's healing. More 
whole than he had ever been, Stein Oleson lived. 
"He'll do for now," Sukey said. "I'll wake him." 
Stein's eyes saw her. For a long time they saw nothing else. 
Felice left them together and went to study the fjord land-scape, 
the porous blocks of lava and masses of unconsolidated 
ash and scoria supporting meager vegetation. It was not until 
hours later—long after Felice had washed their clothes, and 
Sukey had collapsed in a brief reactionary episode, and Stein 
had taken his turn as comforter—that Felice began to speak 
in a matter-of-fact way about her plan for genocide. 
They were sitting around a little fire in the shades of evening. 
The huntress had shown casual power by zapping a lagomorphic 
creature resembling a short-eared jackrabbit. They had grilled 
it for supper, and with the sweet biocake from the balloon 
rations they had had tangy wild grapes. Stein and Sukey, en-joying 
digestion and sweet peace, sat cradled in each other's 
arms not really hearing what Felice said to them.."... and the torc factory was essentially 
unharmed by our 
attack, so the third phase of Madame Guderian's great scheme 
remains unfulfilled. Humanity can still be enslaved by the 
torcs. It doesn't matter that the time-gate's closed. Don't you 
see? All the Tanu have to do is rescind their ban on human-human 
reproduction, and in time the pool of potential slaves 
will be bigger than ever. And don't think that only torced 
humans cooperate with the exotics! You should have seen 
the bareneck human finks blubbering to go home after we 
blasted Finiah. Thoses stupid pathetickers preferred life under 
the Tanu!" 
Stein said to Sukey, "We could go to Bordeaux. Where Rich-ard 
and me figured the wine-loving exiles would live. There could 
be free people there, like Madame Guderian's bunch. Only not 
making war with iron weapons. Just living easy. Sorta Robin-Hooding 
it. I could build us a nice cabin—" 

Felice interrupted. "You haven't been listening to me." 
"Sure I have, Felice. You could stay with us. Both Sukey 
and me owe you. So do all the human beings in Exile. What 
you and the others did—" 
"We weren't able to finish the job, Steinie. As long as that 
torc factory is intact, no bareneck human is safe from slavery. 
The Tanu will be Hunting for us as long as they're top dogs 
in Exile. And remember that human traitors wearing torcs aren't 
poisoned by iron. They're no more vulnerable to it than ordinary 
bareneck folks are. All the Flying Hunt has to do is spot con-cealed 
human settlements from the air, then send in parties of 
torced humans to do the dirty work." "Aw, hell. There's gotta be someplace wild enough to be 
safe. Not all that many of the Tanu can fly. The big guns like 
Nodonn'll be up north where Guderian stirred up the hornet's 
nest—not in Bordeaux. That's a good spot. Richard and me 
were worried about ordinary human outlaws in the Pliocene. 
You grab? We wanted to pick a secure site for our base of 
operations. So we noodled with one of the geology boffins at 
the auberge and came up with Bordeaux. It has big tidal swamps 
with islands of good high land. Richard figured the place'd be 
perfect." 
"Do you know where Richard is now?" Felice's smile was 
dreamy. "I do. I can farsense him easily with my new power. He's in a broken-down exotic flyer in 
a parking orbit forty-nine 
thousand kloms out, going around and around the world 
with the dead body of his lady. He looks at the environmental.readout every now and then and 
laughs. And it is pretty funny, when you think of his costume and all. Because the oxygen is 
nearly all used up." 
Sukey, shocked to wakefulness, broke from Stein's clasp. "Oh, no! Felice, how can you—how can you 
sneer at him in 
such a heartless way? Richard was your friend!" 
For the first time, Sukey dared to assay a strong redactive 
probe into the girl. The mental lancet shattered on impervious 
smoothness. Sukey uttered a soft cry of pain. 
"Don't do that, dear. I'd rather keep my thoughts private 
until I choose to reveal them. I believe that's a simple courtesy 
among the metas of the Milieu. Richard is unimportant." And 
so are you, Redactorwife, so take care! "But Stein is impor-tant 
... to a certain plan of action that I have in mind. I know 
how to bring about the real solution to all our worries." 
Stein and Sukey stared at her. 
Felice said, "I want to wipe out all of these Tanu bastards 
once and for all—while they're gathered in one place for the 
Grand Combat. And as a bonus, we'll get quite a few of the 
Firvulag, too. I never did trust those little friggers and neither 
did Madame Guderian." 
Stein said, "If you expect me to go along on another invasion 
of Muriah, don't hold your breath, sister!" 
"Oh, no, Steinie. Nothing like that." Her fingers caressed 
the hollow of her throat. "I had a golden torc. It made me 
operant, with wonderful powers. And then I was caught and 
the Tanu took my torc away and tried to punish me. But their 
tortures backfired, Steinie. I'm a strange sort of person, you 
know. The suffering made me fully operant. Without a torc. 
I'm as good as the metapsychic world shakers of the Galactic 
Milieu. My PK and creativity are stronger than the powers of 
any of the Tanu Great Ones." 
"No shit," he drawled. "So buck for Queen of the World 
at the Combat!" 
Once again, the dreamy smile. "I have a better idea. That's 
why I need your help... I want to pop the cork at Gibraltar 

and let the Atlantic into the Med Basin. Drown the exotics like 
rats in a barrel. I'll do the heavy blasting, and you'll show me 
where to put the shots so the walls come tumbling down." 
The Viking gave an involuntary shout of exultation. "And 
Pharaoh's army got drowned? Sweet Christ!" 
"Stein!" wailed Sukey. 
"I thought it might appeal to you," Felice said smugly.."No!" Sukey cried. 
He took her in his arms again. "Don't be silly, babe. What 
d'you take me for? There's human beings in Muriah! Elizabeth 
and Raimo. And Amerie and those two guys that got caught 
with her. And even the Fancy Pants Kid! He needs a swift boot, all right—but not drowning." 
Felice said, "Aiken Drum is almost certain to beat Nodonn 
in the Grand Combat and become king. Do you think he'll 
close down the torc factory? Or free the slaves and deprive 
himself of all those trusty human subjects? Don't make me 
laugh!" 
"Dammit—the others!" 
"Amerie and Peo and Basil were terribly wounded. They're 
as good as dead. The only way they could survive would be 
if the Tanu put them into Skin. And why should the exotics 
do that? They plan to roast them alive in the life-offering in 
four days' time." 
"Raimo... Bryan," Stein protested. 
Felice laughed. "They're goners, too. Let's say they loved 
and lived. As for Elizabeth... she could save herself if she 
wanted to." 
Stein's brows lowered in truculence. "You gotta give her 
fair warning. She helped Sukey shrink me. She gave us her 
balloon." 
The little athlete waved one hand in dismissal. "All right. 
A farspoken warning once the thing is in train and she can't 
do anything to stop me." 
"Stein, you can't!" Sukey cried. "Felice is—inhuman!" 
"Oh, yes," the girl agreed. She stirred the fire with a long 
stick. The tepee structure of burning pine branches collapsed 
in an eruption of orange sparks. "But so are the Tanu and 
Firvulag inhuman! If I let in the sea, the Tanu will be virtually 
wiped out and the Firvulag reduced to a manageable small 
population. Free human beings will still have to fight against 
the torc wearers that remain in the mainland cities. But with 
the exotic masters and the torc factory gone, at least we'll have 
a chance. You'll have a chance." 
Not looking at his wife, Stein said, "Sukey—she's right." 
"Steinie, what about all the humans in Muriah who'll be 
drowned?" 
He scowled. "All of 'em that I had anything to do with were 
Tanu-loyal to the toenails." "But Felice is talking about the murder of nearly a hundred.thousand 
living persons! You can't help her, Stein! Not i f ... I 
mean anything to you. Felice is insane! Culluket had her for 
a week. That's enough to—" She broke off, biting her lip. 
Felice was unruffled. "He tortured you, too, Sukey. And 
you didn't go mad. Did she tell you about that, Stein? About 
the interrogation ordered by the Queen? Don't you want to get 
back at the people who tortured Sukey?" 
"Stein knows all about what Culluket did," Sukey cried. 
Sudden fear blazed up. But Stein didn't know about— 
"And don't you want revenge on Thagdal, Steinie?" 
Puzzled, he said, "On the King? But why? He was always 
a pretty good old buffer. A real sport on the Delbaeth Quest." 
"Felice, don't!" Sukey pleaded. "Don't!" 
"Sukey didn't tell you what happened before her interro-gation, 

though—did she, Stein. She didn't want you to do 
something foolish and get yourself killed by the Tanu ... or by 
anybody else. Ask Sukey how the Queen found out about the 
sabotage party." 
"Don't listen to her, Stein! She's lying!" 
"Am I lying, Sukey? I can see the whole thing, right there 
in your memory bank. Too bad Stein's torc is off, or I could 
relay it right to him. You've tried to wall off that memory. But I can read it. Do you know that 
you've been letting it leak? 
Something in your sneaky little subconscious let just the small-est 
bit of the memory seep out for Stein to catch! You wanted 
him to catch it. And he did, too. Just a suspicion. A need 
t o ... blame." 
"Please," Sukey whispered. "Don't do this to him." "Blame?" the Viking's forehead wrinkled. "How 
could I 
blame Sukey for betraying the invasion? I never should've told 
her anything about it. Even Aik warned me not to. I blame 
myself—blame him, too, for putting—" 
"Ass!" Felice hissed. "Not blame for that. For the baby." 
Sukey hid her face on Stein's chest. His arms dropped away 
from her body. He seemed to see something deep in the dying 
campfire. Resin in a burning brand popped. Sukey's sobs were 
quiet, hopeless. 
"King Thagdal," Stein said at last. "In spite of what Aiken 
and Mayvar and Dionket promised. He had Sukey." 
"When she was already pregnant with your child. And some 
women—they have to be careful in the first weeks. Before the 
little embryo is latched on tight. So now you know who to 
blame.".Big arms came up, enfolding the shuddering form. Stein 
did not look at Felice nor at his Wife. He watched the flames. 
"We'll have to do a recon from the air. Surface, too, maybe. 
Can you make the balloon go any direction you want?" 
"Of course." 
"Tomorrow, then." He repeated: "Tomorrow. Early." 
Elizabeth returned to the room without doors. 
There was nowhere else to go unless she was willing to wait 
passively in Muriah until the Host finally deciphered her per-sonal 
snuff-sequence and finished her off. Since the escape of 
the balloon, they had had a dozen top-line farsensors locked 
onto her, so there was no possibility of her slipping away from 
Aven by ordinary means. And the Shipspouse had declared, 
with every evidence of sincere regret, that she was incompetent 
to teleport her to safety. It was a pity, Brede had lamented, 
that Elizabeth herself did not possess more PK! For a very short 
time, Elizabeth had believed the exotic woman's protestations. 
But then the sly Two-Faced One had given herself away. 
Her great racial vision—her foresight—if only Elizabeth would 
help her to make the last clarification! There was a role to be 
played by one of them, or both ... and if they studied in Unity, 
they would surely discover the truth. 
Elizabeth would have fled Brede's room—and Dionket had 
offered her sanctuary in his conspirators' hideout up in the 
Mount of Heroes. But she knew that even the natural shielding 
of the rock was insufficient to shut out the hostile ones. Nodonn 
now coordinated more than two hundred of them with growing 
sophistication. If any of them happened to discover that one 
pattern of assault, and launched it while she was asleep, she 
would never awaken. 
Only in the room without doors was she safe from them. 
As for Brede ... there was a way to be rid of her importunities 
as well. Away, false Unity. Away, seductive two-in-one with 

your cheating prolepsis that led only to another using. Elizabeth 
would accept no comfort if the price was responsibility. Not 
in a situation so hopelessly barbaric, so alien to her human 
metapsychic nature. True human beings would always be de-feated 
in this Exile that was controlled by exotic races. And 
Elizabeth was too weary and heartsick to condemn herself to 
a wait of six million years. 
The mind-voice of Brede kept calling: We need you! All.three races do! Only look and see how it 
might be. Look and 
take comfort. I will not look. I will not be used. You tricked me once to 
attain full operancy, to become adept. And not for the sake of 
your people, as you said, but to gain access to me. To be able 
to reach me with your temptation, O well-named Two-Face. But I will not be your savior, exotic. 
Such a role cannot be 
coerced. You have no comfort for me. My comfort is six million 
years distant and this Pliocene theosphere is inhuman and un-tempered 
by incarnation. So let me alone. Let me alone... 
Cocooned in the old fire, Elizabeth drifted away. Brede's calls became fainter and fainter, 
finally dwindling into silence..5 
"THE STRAIT WAS ONLY ABOUT TWENTY-FIVE KLOMS ACROSS in our time," Stein told Felice. "And that was 
after six million 
years of scouring by ocean currents. You won't be able to blast 
a gap anything like that wide, you know." 
The two of them leaned over the rail of the gondola. The 
red balloon, held motionless by the girl's PK, was poised 300 
meters above the crest of the Gibraltar Isthmus. The heights 
were rounded by erosion. Cedar trees grew in the western 
downslope valleys. There were dunes and rippling grassy hil-locks 
on the Atlantic side of the land-bridge, but on the Med-iterranean 
flank the isthmus was barren, falling off in an awesome 
escarpment with sharp buttresses and a tumble of great shattered 
blocks at the foot, below which were smoother sediments dip-ping 
to the Alboran Basin. 
Felice said, "The terrain-clearance readout and altimeter put 
that Gib crest at only two-sixty-eight. If you're right about the 
isthmus being riddled with caves like a Swiss cheese, I should 
be able to rupture it. Looks to me like it's overdue to crumble 
from natural causes. And that eastern dropoff goes way below 
sea level." 
"We could see Gibraltar from my satellite," Sukey said. 
She smiled into the blue, cloudless sky. "The place where 
Europe kisses Africa, we called it! We were very sentimental 
about Earth." 
Felice ignored her. "Where would be the best place for my 
first zap, Steinie? Don't worry about the shockwave hitting the 
balloon. I'll spin a big bubble-shield around us. How about if 
I blast that little headland sticking out?" 
"Hold it, dummy!" he exclaimed. "You want a real tidal.wave? Or just a slow-creeping thing like a 
friggerty filling 
bathtub that gives 'em plenty of time to make a getaway?" 
"Did you see my satellite up in the night sky when you 
worked in Lisboa, Steinie?" Sukey asked. "Up above the world 
so high?" 
"Hydraulic pressure!" Stein said, smacking left fist into right 
palm. "That's what we need, kid! A good head of water. A 
great big surge that comes crashing through the estuary of the 
Southern Lagoon to the White Silver Plain and floods the bat-tlefield 
fast!" 
"My thoughts exactly," Felice said. "I'll torch the isthmus 
in a lot of different places. The gap's bound to widen and let 
a zillion tons of water in. For crissake, the whole Atlantic's 

pushing!" 
Sukey said, "Most of us on ON-15 spent a lot of time looking 
at Earth. Especially the people who'd never been there. Fourth-generation 
satelliters like me. Odd that we'd want to do that, 
wasn't it? We had everything we could possibly want in our 
beautiful satellite." 
"Little Miss Smartass! Even if you hit the fault lines, touched 
off a major subsidence, you'd never get an opening here more 
than five-six kloms wide to start with. Okay! The sea squirts 
through and you got the most hellaceous waterfall in history. 
But Muriah is almost a thousand kloms away from here! And 
you saw that big bugger of a dry basin between here and 
Alboran." 
"You mean—it would swallow the surge?" 
Sukey said, "Our lovely hollow satellite. Wherever you 
stood on the inside surface of the cylinder, the central axis was 
up. It spun to simulate gravity. Sometimes the strangeness of 
it drove Earthsider visitors crazy! But we were used to it. The 
human brain is an adaptable organism. For almost everything." 
"That damn basin would kill our head of water deader 'n 
Saturday night in Peoria! So don't go zapping this isthmus yet, 
baby. First we gotta go back and seal up the fjord. Get the 
picture?" 
"Build up another head of water?" 
"Checko. With the fjord shut, that old volcanic line between 
the Costa del Sol and Africa forms a natural dam. A kind of 
threshold maybe two hundred and fifty kloms north to south— 
but not very wide, not very high. The marsh is west of it, 
taking the outflow from that Spanish river. The fjord is— 
what?—a hundred meters deep? So if we plug it, we got a.long, long dam! And not made of tough rock 
like Gibraltar, 
either. Just unconsolidated ash and cinders and lava hunks." 
"It would be much safer inside Hollow Earth than at Bor-deaux, 
Steinie," Sukey said. "It's still not too late for us to 
find the way." "I think I understand," Felice said, nodding. "When we get 
a good head of water behind this soft dam, then I rip the thing 
open." 
"If you got the gigawatts, kid." "Wait and see, big boy! You're sure the dam will hold until 
I'm ready to blow it?" 
"Looked like it. And if you're as good as you say you are, 
you could always shore it up if it started to crack too soon." 
"Kaleidoscopic! Let's highball it to the fjord and I'll show 
you how good I am!" Felice began to manipulate the heat 
generator. The balloon mounted rapidly into the air. 
"They might not want to let Felice into Hollow Earth, Stei-nie." 
Sukey's face was anxious. "Violence isn't allowed in the 
peaceful realm of Agharta. Only kindness. But what'll become 
of her if we don't take her with us? Poor Felice... all alone 
with the dead ones!" 
Stein took his wife's shoulders and gently pressed her down. 
"You rest awhile, Sue. Take a nap, maybe. Don't worry about 
Felice or Hollow Earth. I'll take care of everything from now 
on." 
Sukey's mouth trembled. "I'm sorry you can't go, Felice. 
Steinie's changed now. He's gentle and good. He'll fit in. But 
not you... Let's go to Agharta now, Stein. I don't want to 
wait any longer." 
"Soon," he assured her. "Try to sleep." He made her as 
comfortable as he could on the floor of the gondola. 
Felice's creative metafunction conjured two air masses of 
dissimilar pressure. A wind began to blow from the Atlantic, 

carrying the balloon directly toward the fjord. Felice's eyes 
shone. "If I pedal real fast, Steinie, we can be there and back 
before lunch. You're sure this ploy will do the job?" 
"When that clinker dam lets go, you'll have one vicious 
granny-banger of a tidal wave chargin' down that narrow South-ern 
Lagoon. Make old Noah eat his heart out." 
Sukey buried her head in her arms. One gleam of hope 
shone through her nightmare. Elizabeth! With this new golden 
torc, it might be possible to— 
Silly fool! (Sukey's sanity tottered.) Don't you think I've.been expecting you to try something 
like that? (You can't get 
me—I'm running!) I've got you screened so thick you couldn't 
even spit without my say-so! (But you'll never catch me where 
I'm going.) Warn them, would you? You little hypocrite! Deep 
down inside your stupid virtue you want this just as much as 
we do! (No, no, no.) Yes, yes, yes! 
Escape.... 
Sukey tried to drag Stein along with her. But his torc was 
gone. She could no longer pull him like a child. She could 
only beg, plead with nonmeta rationality, and hope that he 
would change his mind and follow her as she retreated. 
Deep down there, the way to Agharta still had to be open. 
It was something to keep him busy, and it did not require 
moving about on his rudely splinted broken legs, and so Basil 
spent most of his waking hours scraping away at the solid rock 
wall of their prison cell with a vitredur spoon. 
By the seventh day, he had made an indentation approxi-mately 
fifteen centimeters long, four high, and one deep. Chief 
Burke, in one of his last fully lucid moments, had told him, 
"Keep working! When you break through, we'll be able to post 
a letter: 'Help. I am a prisoner in a dungeon in Middle Earth.'" 
But that about marked the end of the brave jests and stiff-upperlipping, 
for Burke became delirious and addressed Basil 
from then on as "Counsel for the Defense," shouting tirades 
that apparently reprised his wittier pronunciamentos from the 
bench. Amerie was less noisy in her ravings, only leaning 
toward the more bloodthirsty psalms when the agony from her 
suppurating burns was most intense. By the tenth day of their 
imprisonment, the nun and the big Native American were help-less 
and incapable of speech. It was left to Basil, with only 
one of his fractures compounded, and that not even gangrenous 
yet, to remove their single daily meal from the turntable door-wicket, 
exchange the full slop bucket for an empty one, and 
tend to his dying friends as well as he could in pitch-darkness. 
When these melancholy chores were done, he would return 
to his patient scraping at the letter slot. 
Sometimes he dozed when the pain permitted it, and dreamed. 
He became an undergraduate again and punted on the Isis; 
squabbled with other dons over esoteric fripperies; even climbed 
mountains (but always with the summits out of reach—alas 
for the Pliocene Everest!). 
He might have dreamed the bizarre woman as well..She was gowned in metallic red and black all 
adorned with 
flameshapes and beadwork, and wore the butterfly-shaped pad-ded 
headdress of the middle fifteenth century. She was not a 
human being, not a Tanu either, and she seemed to have two 
faces—one comely and one grotesque. He tried to warn her 
tactfully about the slop bucket as she came shimmering through 
the stone wall, but like many an apparition, she only smiled 
and looked enigmatic. 
"Do tell me how I can be of service to you, then," Basil said, resting on his elbows in the muck. 

"It's ironic—but I really do need your help," said the woman. 
"Yours and that of your friends." 
"Oh, hard lines," Basil said. "You see, they're more or less 
dying. And I think my left leg's finally going off. Getting 
rather noisome where the fibula ends protrude from the flesh." 
The woman glowed. She had a kind of haversack, all be-jeweled 
like the rest of her, and she took from it a considerable 
quantity of very thin transparent membrane, resembling plass. 
With no ceremony, she knelt down on the floor amidst the 
garbage and stinking puddles and smears of excrement and 
began wrapping the unconscious Amerie in this stuff; and when 
the nun was packaged like a choice cut in a butcher case, she 
enswathed Chief Burke. 
"They're not quite dead, you know," Basil protested. "They'll 
smother." 
"The Skin does not bring death, but life," the bizarre woman 
said. "You are needed alive. Sleep now and have no fear. Your 
gray torcs will be gone when you awake." 
And before he could open his mouth in further demur, she 
had him entangled in the membrane, and then the dream of her 
faded away along with Peo and Amerie and the dungeon and 
all the rest of it. 
Up until the time that Felice blew up the fjord, Stein had 
lived his whole Pliocene experience as some misbegotten cul-turedrama. 
It had been wilder and scarier and more vivid than the 
immersive pageants he had been thrown out of way back in 
the Milieu of his young manhood; but when you came right 
down to it, life in Exile was just as stone friggerty unreal. The 
bloodletting in Castle Gateway, the fever-dream sequence cul-minating 
in the deep-redact by Elizabeth and Sukey, the auction 
banquet and the fight with the animal in the arena and the.slaying of the dancing predator and the 
Delbaeth Quest... unreal! 
Any day now, any minute even, his participation in the show 
was going to come to an end and he would turn in his Viking 
costume and go out the exit and back into the real world of 
the twenty-second century. 
Even at this moment, with his mind convalescent and sus-picious, 
some evaluating segment of the cortex refused to ac-cept 
the balloon journey as anything but an extension of the 
dream. Down below lay a pretty fjord entrance of colored lava 
cliffs. A big cindercone at stage right. Fakey-looking ever-greens 
like overgrown bonsai clinging to the heights. Small 
wooded islets with flowering shrubs and mangrove thickets 
dotted here and there on mirror-smooth water. A big flock of 
pink flamingos over in the shallows, scoffing up lunch. 
Unreal! He could see the posters: 
SAVOR YOUR ANCIENT FAERIE HERITAGE 
IN FANTASTIC PLIOCENELAND! 
But all of a sudden, while he still floated in reverie, Felice 
leaned from the gondola and pointed a finger. 
Their balloon was enclosed in the metapsychic shielding. 
But the flash, the concussion beating around them, the clouds 
of dark dust and fountaining earth and rock—they were not 
make-believe. He had known this kind of destruction before. 
He had caused it. The blasting of the fjord and the small vol-canic 
cone next to it shocked him more profoundly than any-thing 
else he had lived through since passing the time-gate. He 
saw with vision new-born the roiling dust and steam, the ruined 
marshland, the bodies of the birds. His ears, preternaturally 
acute, heard Sukey's sobs and the mad giggling of Felice. 

Real. 
One of his hands reached out to the balloon controls and 
increased the output of the heat generator. They began to rise 
and shortly it was possible to survey the results of Felice's 
strike. What had been the entrance to the channel was now 
piled deep in rubble. Stein's earth driller's eye estimated that 
the landslide from the demolished cindercone bulked at no less 
than half a million cubic meters. 
Felice grinned at him. "Now do you believe, Steinie?" 
"Yeah." He turned from the gondola rail. His guts were tied 
in the old familiar knot. He tasted bile as he knelt to comfort 
poor cowering Sukey. "I believe, all right."."We'll fly slowly over to the eastern end of the 
fjord, then. 
I'll whomp up quieter slides to block the rest of the passage— 
but I couldn't resist trying one little zap over here. My first 
shot! Did I blast rock like a pro?" 
"One—little—zap?" Stein muttered. 
"Well, actually I was afraid to really let loose this close to 
Muriah. I mean—only six hundred kloms away! They might 
have seismographs or something. It wouldn't do to let them 
know that something unnatural was going on. But a single 
small zap can pass for an earthquake. Right?" 
"Sure, Felice. Sure." 
Sukey clung to him, shivering. Ghostly drumrolls, relics of 
the monstrous explosion, still flailed and echoed among the 
ashy hills. Real. It was real. Sukey was. And Felice was. 
After a time, the little blonde athlete extinguished the pro-tective 
bubble and let the ambient atmosphere in again. She 
hung partly out of the car, laughing as she triggered rockfalls. 
Dust floated up on the thermals and settled all over the decamole 
surfaces. That was what made Stein's eye water, what set his 
teeth on edge. 
"Oh! Sorry about the mess, guys." The bright goddess ban-ished 
the sifting grit in a flourish of psychokinetic power. "All 
finished here! Now we'll hurry back to Gibraltar and get down 
to serious business." 
"You see, Steinie?" Sukey whispered to him. "Now do you 
see?" But he said nothing, only held her very tight. 
Westward again flew the red balloon, impelled by Felice's 
wind. Over Alboran and its train of extinct subsidiary cones; 
beyond the deep dry basin; up the slope that rose to the Gibraltar 
rampart; across the crest and out over the sea, to stop sus-pended 
above the Atlantic, where white scallopings of surf 
fringed the great beach that stretched unbroken from the margin 
of the Guadalquivir Gulf in Spain south to Tangier. 
"Now come up and stand beside me, Stein," Felice ordered 
him. "We're far enough out over the ocean to be safe from the 
fallout. Show me where to begin ... Come on, Steinie!" 
"Yeah, yeah." Sukey was gripping the front of his tunic 
with extraordinary strength. He unfastened her fingers. 
"No," she begged. "No, Stein, no." 
"Stay down," he told her, kissing the white knuckles of her 
hands. "Don't look." 
Felice took hold of the load cables and clambered aloft. She.stood barefooted on the rim of the 
gondola, facing the shore. "Show me! Show me right now!" 
He pointed. "Where that deep straight-line ravine comes down north of the little point. Can 
you—can you see under 
the ground at all? Through the rocks, like Aiken could?" 
She gave him a startled look over her shoulder. "I never 
thought of it! But if he could.. .oh! It's like—funny great piles of lights and shadows! Huge 
sandwichy chunks leaning 

every which way. Other darker stuff, some blobby, some too opaque to see through at all. How 
marvelous!" 
His jaw tightened. He was as far away from her as he could get in the small gondola, the 
instrumentation shelf jabbing into 
his rump. He did not dare to look at Sukey. 
Felice burbled on. "Those are rock formations that I see, 
aren't they? Under that straight ravine is a great big surface that slants away underground toward 
the south. A kind of 
meeting place between two gigantic slabs of rock that are— bent." 
"It's one of the faults at the continental-plate boundary. You 
start by hitting the strata above the slanting interface of the slip. Bust the whole thing up. 
You'll need a string of strong 
shots. Start deep under the water if you can, then come ashore underneath, still blasting, and 
continue right into the hillside." 
"I get it. Ready? There—!" 
Stein closed his eyes. He was under the sea again himself, riding his drill-rig in armor, in 
control of emerald fury. When 
he blasted, great blocks of planetary crust moved or were melted. 
Muted thunder spent itself harmlessly against the sigma-fields that sheltered him. He torched his 
way through the lithosphere, 
the screen of the rig's geodisplay showing the Earth's structure in three dimensions— 
"They're cracking, Steinie! Way down there! But not the 
rocks on top. What's wrong? There are only tremors on top. The isthmus is still solid!" 
"Dumb broad. You think this is gonna be easy? Keep hitting it north of the slip. Farther inland!" 
"All right—you don't have to get nasty!" 
The ground quivered. There were a few minor landslides. A peculiar change came over the pattern of 
Atlantic waves 
reflecting from the small pointed promontory. He said, "That's enough. Now get this damn balloon 
over 
onto the east side of the isthmus." 
The gondola lurched but Felice clung easily to the web of.cables. The balloon seemed to be dragged 
through the sky by 
a genie force. It crossed the Gibraltar crest a kilometer high 
and came to a halt in emptiness above the dry Alboran Basin. 
"Now look under the rocks again," Stein said. "As deep as 
you can. Tell me what you see." "Urn... the shadows make this big bend. A huge U-shape 
lying between Spain and Africa. The bottom of the U points 
to the Atlantic. But the cracks are all different here. There are 
smaller ones branching out of the U's curve. And way, way 
down is this hot thing—" 
"Stay the hell out of that! You're starting to blast at the 
surface now. But below sea level, on this eastern slope. About 
where the yellow rock layer is. You grab? Tunnel in. Push the 
junk out of the way. Hit the caves. Then blow the roof out. 
Never mind about making the cut wide or straight. Just dig 
deep and head in the general direction of that other slanting 
fault you were working on." 
She nodded, turned her back to him. There was a fearful 
blaze of light and unending noise. The balloon's gondola swayed 
gently as the girl shifted position; but the other two passengers 
felt none of the shock waves, tasted none of the dust. They 
floated unscathed while Felice smote the earth and debris boiled 
up. The easterly wind carried streamers out over the Atlantic. 
The girl sent bolt after bolt of psychoenergy into the landbridge 
which was, at sea level, perhaps twenty kilometers wide at the 
narrowest part. She hacked out a long crevice, never more than 
fifty meters across except where some great cavern's roof was 
undermined, creating a sinkhole. Clogging masses of rock ex-ploded 
into dust for the winds to scatter. 
She struck. She struck! Five kilometers in. And ten. Carve 
and rend! Make a sluiceway for the cleansing waters. Fifteen 

kilometers in. Blast. Blast! Slower now, through the heart of 
the rotten isthmus. On to where the Atlantic waits. Strike. 
Strike. Wearily now, but continue. Find the energy somewhere. 
In some other space, some other time? Who cares where the 
power comes from. Only focus. Hit! Hit again. Again. And 
now so close. And now... now... yes. Through. 
Through? 
Laugh. See, Felicia Tonans, ignorant child-flinger of mind-bolts! 
See what you've done, boobing it! 
You've let the cut become shallower and shallower as you 
drove westward, weakening. And now the breakthrough, when 
it comes, is a ridiculous anticlimax. The penetration is a scant.meter below natural sea level. 
The Atlantic enters diffidently, 
trickling along the rough hot floor of your incompetent chasm. 
It has been long millions of years since the waters flowed in 
this direction, toward the Empty Sea. The way is strange... 
"Felice! For God's sake! You gotta do better than that— 
it's just piddling through! Plane out that friggin' gradient!" 
She drooped, still clutching the balloon cables. The protec-tive 
bubble attenuated. Around them, heat rose. With it came 
a smell of rock dust and molten minerals. 
"Tired. So tired, Steinie." 
"Get on with it! The rock underneath is busted to hell along 
the main fault. Keep going! Hit the sucker, I tellya! The rock'll 
rupture from water pressure if you just get the cut deep enough. 
Can't you see that with your damn X-ray vision?" 
She didn't reply, didn't even cuss him out, only swayed a 
little with her eyes shut and her little bare dirty feet trying to 
grasp the gondola's padded rail. 
He screamed at her. "Do it, you almighty bitch! You can't 
just stop. You said you could do it! God—you said you could 
do it!" The car rocked with the vehemence of his rage, his fear, 
his shame. Oh, shame. 
Felice was nodding slowly. Somewhere, the strength she 
needed might be found. 
Call for it, seek it. Search it out among these infantile, 
asynergic sparks of life-force that are Earth's Pliocene Mind. 
The two-in-one (now oddly separate) refuse you, as you knew 
they would. And the many-in-All so much farther out, who had 
also helped before on the River Rhone, now withhold and try 
to show you other ways. But you have chosen and it must be, 
and there is one other source of the energy, so bright, so early-rising, 
who will not turn away. Here then is a better Unity for 
you, here is power to brim your height and depth and breadth 
at least until the end. So you accept. The energy comes. You 
harness it with your creative metafunction; mold, compress, 
convert. And then you hurl it down... 
With no metapsychic shield in place, the balloon caught the 
full force of the shockwave and was thrown far up and away. 
Stein gave a great shriek and so did another. Bodies inside the 
gondola flopped as helplessly as dolls, crushed against deca-mole 
surfaces, against bruising human flesh and bone. 
Deafened, Stein and Sukey struggled together in the tossing 
basket. Neither could help the other. The tough envelope bil-lowed, 
struck the hot grid of the generator but rebounded un-.scorched, whirled in a vortex. Spiraling 
upward, the balloon broke free at last from the storm-cell of ionized turbulence. 
What had been a distorted, kiting scarlet blob smoothed and reexpanded. It sailed in the high thin 
air, slowly descending 
to its altitude of equilibrium. Stein dared to rise, to look out. 
Below, the waterfall of the western ocean flowed. All of the smoke and dust was streaming over the 
Atlantic, 

making it easy for him to see what they had done. The gap in 
the isthmus widened even as he watched. Brown and yellow 
rocks on either side appeared to melt like sugar in the torrent's press. To the east, the cataract 
outflow poured into the Empty 
Sea across a front nearly ten kilometers wide. A blanket of 
mist, grayish tan from suspended dust that muddied the drop- lets, hid the Alboran Basin floor. 
He heard Sukey's voice. She climbed to her feet and stood 
beside him. "Where—?" she asked. 
He said, "She might have been able to fly. Like Aiken could. Try with your golden torc." 
She pressed the warm collar, looking down at the streaks 
of wrath streaming westward from the sundered isthmus. Un-less 
the surface winds shifted, no one at Muriah would see the smoke. 
"There's nothing, Stein. Nothing." 
The balloon continued its descent. Seeming not to have heard her, he consulted the instruments. 
"Three-five-two-eight 
meters, heading oh-two-three. Another airflow up here. Pretty 
close to the direction we want to go." He manipulated the heat generator. 
"Steinie, I've got to tell Elizabeth!" 
"All right. Just her. Nobody else." The balloon attained equilibrium. The ground-speed display 
told of their progress, but it seemed to the man and woman 
that they hung motionless in the clean blue sky. "She doesn't answer me, Stein. I don't know 
what's wrong! 
My farspeech isn't very strong, but Elizabeth should be able 
to receive it on the human mode—" He gave a sudden start, grabbed her by the upper arms. 
"Don't you try calling the others!" 
She squirmed. "Stop it, Steinie! I didn't. Nobody else can —" She gaped at him. He was opening one 
of the lockers, 
taking something out. "Oh, no," she whispered. "I love you. But you can't stop it. Even without 
Felice to.break the dam, the flood's going to happen. The whole night-mare 
wiped out. Elizabeth... if she's still there, she'll save 
herself. You don't have to worry about her. You don't have 
to worry about any of them anymore." 
Cold metal touched her neck. Her vision of him, of the 
anguish-scarred and merciless Viking face, blurred with her 
tears. 
"Don't be afraid," he said. "It's better this way." 
With great care, he slid one blade of the steel cutters behind 
her golden torc. He began to close the handles. The double 
levers worked. 
Brede! her mind cried. Brede! 
He shorn torc fell away, hurting. But even with its loss the 
reply came: 
Be at peace Little Daughter it will happen as foreseen..6 
THE SECOND DAY OF THE GRAND COMBAT INITIATED THE FIRST 
of the battles to the death: the Low Melee, also known as the 
Contest of Humans. In the time before the opening of the time-gate, 
these preliminary fights had served to showcase the talents 
of novice Tanu warriors of special expertise; but now only 
gray-torcs took part in them. Hundreds of male gladiators and 
a small number of gray women contended in elimination bouts 
that featured every conceivable form of martial art. One section 
of the ritual battlefield was partitioned into smaller courts so 
that the spectators could savor the blood sports at close range. 
The bookmakers had their finest hour; but a groan went up 
from human and Tanu fans (especially the Finiah refugees) 
when it was announced that two of the top-ranked gray con-tenders 
had been scratched. Neither Stein nor the infamous 
Felice appeared in the lists and no explanation was given tor 
their absence. 
The fighting continued from dawn until noon, accompanied 
by much festivity and culminating in a bloody free-for-all sym-bolic 

of the original character of the event. Victorious grays 
who were without injury retired to prepare themselves for the 
High Melee on the morrow, where they would join the silvers 
and golds and veteran gray warriors in the ritual war pitting 
Tanu against Firvulag. Battered gladiators who had acquitted 
themselves well in the tournament were escorted by redactors 
to the medical pavilions, where they joined the recuperating 
warrior-maids in the Skin wards. The handful of badly wounded 
losers who still lived and the cravens were sequestered in a 
handsome glass structure resembling a box-seat section cano-pied 
in silver and black cloth, which stood at the far southern.end of the battlefield on top of stout 
scaffolding. Its walls were 
transparent and unbreakable. 
In theory, the remaining time of the Second Day was devoted 
to choosing Combat leaders by means of manifestation of pow-ers— 
after which the Foes separated for a final War Feast and 
invocation to the Goddess prior to the start of hostilities at 
sunrise. In practice, the great captains had all been selected 
hundreds (or even thousands) of years ago and now merely 
stepped forward to dare any upstart to usurp their privilege. If 
a challenge was forthcoming, both parties might manifest their 
metapsychic powers on the spot and be judged by the battle-company 
of their race. The reigning champions also had the 
option of dueling contenders with both weapons and meta-functions 
at any time during the High Melee. 
As overall losers in the previous year's Combat, the Firvulag 
presented their captains first. The regal platform was expanded 
into a much larger Dais of Challenge with the two Kings and 
noncombatant nobility enthroned well back out of range of any 
stray thrusts. Rivals were supposed to confine their psycho-energetic 
coups to one another—but accidents had been known 
to happen; and so a squad of shield conjurers from the PK 
Guild took up positions around the perimeter of the stage to 
protect the crowd with an invisible wall. The Tanu Marshal of 
Sport then introduced the Firvulag Great Ones, who simply 
stood forth and then retired to applause from the triracial as-sembly 
when no challenges came from the ranks. 
The presentation of the Firvulag leadership was swift, al-most 
perfunctory. Medor, Ayfa, Galbor Redcap, Skathe, Nu-kalavee 
the Skinless, Tetrol Bonecrusher, Bles Four-Fang, 
Betularn of the White Hand, and finally Sharn-Mes all accepted 
plaudits and stood down unchallenged. Lastly, in a major but 
fully expected break with the tradition of recent unhappy years, 
the Firvulag Battlemaster was proclaimed by King Yeochee. 
Not Sharn the Younger, who had undertaken the thankless job 
during the past twenty Combats—but Pallol One-Eye himself. 
The irascible old First Comer, gigantic in his full suit of 
obsidian mail and monstrous crested helm, ascended the Dais 
of Challenge to tumultuous acclaim. There were many—Tanu 
and Firvulag as well as human—who had never seen his power 
manifested. Others, now that he had returned to the Combat 
after his long absence, jested that his faculties must surely have 
atrophied from disuse. No one dared challenge him; but as a.technical neophyte he was obliged to 
demonstrate his primary metafaculty before the assembled field. 
Pallol stood with legs wide apart and spike-studded arms 
flung out. He leaned back so that he appeared to be gazing 
directly at the high sun. His visor remained shut but the hushed 
onlookers knew, nevertheless, that it hid not one eye—but 
two. The right was a normal orb having an iris colored deep 
red. The left was of a color unfathomable, usually shuttered 
behind a patch but now beyond doubt naked and dreadful. 

Clouds summoned by the awesome creative power of the 
old ogre materialized in the sky. They were thick and dark and 
low-hanging, with unnatural ruddy lightning blinking in their 
depths. The black-armored monster did not move. Of its own 
volition, his helmet visor slowly opened. 
Twin purple discharges scorched down from the clouds into 
Pallol's gauntleted palms, begetting a shattering clap of thun-der. 
From the gaping helm a coherent scarlet beam blasted 
skyward, carving a tunnel through the cloud in the manner of 
a cannonball punching through a snowbank. The sun illumined 
Pallol's Eye. His visor closed. The sky brightened to blue. 
"Slitsal, Pallol!" cried the chivalry of the Firvulag. "Slitsal, 
Pallol Battlemaster! Slitsal!" 
King Yeochee arose from his throne and roared out, "We 
confirm Pallol One-Eye as Battlemaster, to defend our racial 
honor in this Grand Combat!" 
Thus ended the Firvulag manifestation of power, and the 
Tanu prepared to take their turn upon the Dais of Challenge. 
At this point in the proceedings in years past, many of the 
Little People among the spectators had tended to drift away 
discourteously, being by that time of the day ferociously hungry 
as well as sweltering in their armor or heavy clothing under 
the Mediterranean sun. But on this occasion the Firvulag held 
their places. The grapevine had promised a widespread shakeup 
in the Tanu hierarchy and none of the Little People wanted to 
miss the fun. 
Things began tamely enough as the lowest-ranked among the Tanu Great Ones ascended to acclaim. 
Bleyn the psycho-kinetic 
hybrid was unchallenged, and after him came Alberonn 
Mindeater, another mixed-blood who had earned his place at 
the High Table through creative mastery in battle. And then 
there stood forth Lady Bunone Warteacher in her silver-green 
armor and hawksbeak helm, and Tagan Lord of Swords—these 
two being most directly responsible for the training of the gray-.torc warriors and cheered most 
loudly by the humans and hy-brids 
in the crowd. 
After the fighting specialists came the Guild Presidents. 
These could, by ancient custom, delegate a Combat deputy if 
they were not inclined to take to the battlefield in person. Any 
challenge, however, would have to be answered by the principal 
in a manifestation of power. 
The Marshal of Sport announced: "The President of the 
Guild of Redactors, Dionket Lord Healer!" 
Unarmed and empty-handed, the gaunt figure in simple scar-letand-
white robes ascended the dais. 
"Is there a challenge?" 
There was not. Dionket gestured and a tall warrior wearing 
ruby armor came and stood beside him. "I delegate Lord Cul-luket 
the King's Interrogator as Second Redactor, to defend 
our Guild's honor in the Grand Combat." The two retired to 
cheers from Tanu and humankind. The Firvulag hummed 
mockingly. 
"The President of the Guild of Psychokinetics, Nodonn Lord 
of Goriah!" 
The rosy-gold one came forward, not to claim leadership 
as Lord Psychokinetic, but to await challenge. There was none, 
of course, and so he delegated his brother Kuhal Earthshaker 
as Second, since he himself would undertake the role of Bat-tlemaster. 
As the two stepped down the Tanu cheers were 
louder, the human distinctly subdued, and the Firvulag hum-ming 
more vicious. 

"The President of the Guild of Coercers, Sebi-Gomnol Lord 
Coercer!" 
The crowd noise chopped off. 
King Thagdal rose from his throne, diamond armor ablaze. 
"Our dear son Sebi-Gomnol having been gathered unto Tana's peace, we declare the Presidency of the 
Guild of Coercers 
vacant and call for aspirants to stand forth in this manifestation 
of power." 
Imidol the sapphire titan mounted the dais to howls of Tanu 
acclamation. Then came another tall form, his blue armor and 
helmeted head cloaked and hooded in dull-bronzen brocade. 
The Marshal of Sport cleared his throat. 
"Awful King and Father! Noble battle-company of the Tanu! 
Here before you aspirant stand Lord Imidol—" 
Cheers and jeers.."—and Leyr the Banished, predecessor to Sebi-Gomnol in 
the Presidency of the Guild of Coercers." 
Gasps and hoots came from Tanu and Firvulag alike as the 
bronze fabric fell away. The deposed Lord Coercer stood de-corous 
beside his louring young rival. 
For a long moment Thagdal was silent. He had known what 
was in the wind, of course. And thousands of years ago on far 
Duat, another unseated and exiled Great One had dared to 
attempt a comeback, so there was precedent. He addressed the 
two: "Will you manifest here and now or will you duel?" 
And Imidol responded, as was his right as a member of the 
High Table, "We will duel unto the death in the High Melee 
at such moment as the Goddess may choose." 
Tanu spectators applauded stiffly while the Little Folk 
whooped and screeched at the evident discomfiture of the Foe. 
The blue-armored coercers stepped down. 
"The President of the Guild of Creators, Aluteyn Crafts-master!" 
The stout old Tanu in the jeweled caftan came forward as 
the Marshal called for any challenge. Gulls flew overhead, 
uttering creaky cries in the ensuing silence. A light eastern 
breeze blew Aluteyn's silver-vermeil hair and long mustaches 
back from his stony face. He glared over the heads of the vast 
crowd and seemed to contemplate the pale lagoon that lapped 
the White Silver Plain in shallow harmlessness. 
"I challenge," said Mercy. 
The crowd opened for her. She came up to stand facing 
Aluteyn, wearing for form's sake a delicately wrought suit of 
parade armor, silver-lustre glass all embossed and enameled 
with green ornamentation and inlaid with emeralds. Mercy's 
head was bare except for a narrow emerald diadem, and her 
glorious red hair floated free. 
"Awful Father! Lord Creator! Noble battle-company!" cried 
the Marshal. "Here before you challenging stands Lady Mercy-Rosmar 
of Goriah, wife to Nodonn Battlemaster." 
"Will you manifest," Thagdal inquired, "or will you duel?" 
"I will manifest," declared Aluteyn Craftsmaster. "Let the 
Kral be borne forth." 
The ceremonial cauldron, which Creator Guild personnel 
had kept covered at one side of the dais, was placed between 
Mercy and Aluteyn. The Firvulag throng was now almost out 
of control, straining close to the platform on their side of the 
field and making an uproar of derisive twitters, growls, and a.deep bourdon drone of humming that 
now reached a crescendo 
of maddening whole-tone intervals. 
The chain of silence was shaken again and again. Finally 
Mercy was able to speak. 
"I, Mercy-Rosmar, call upon Aluteyn Craftsmaster to dev-astate 

if he can the creation I will manifest here before you." 
She and the old man confronted each other across the huge 
kettle, arms extended. An emanation like a wispy rainbow 
began to stream from Mercy's mailed fingers. In response, a 
flood of blackness flowed out of the Craftsmaster's hands, 
enveloping not only the small colored whirlwind but Mercy 
and the entire cauldron as well. The Tanu spectators gave a 
triumphant shout. Torced humans and Firvulag groaned and 
hissed. 
The black tide swelled into an inky amoeboid blob. Beneath 
it, the side of the platform nearest the Firvulag commenced to 
fizzle and flame as though the white stone were being attacked 
by some ectoplasmic acid. The Little People shrank back as 
the PK shielders made a gesture. 
Aluteyn laughed. 
But something was glowing within the dark mass like a rare 
green star emerging from a coalsack nebula. The blackness 
thinned. Mercy reappeared, poised in vapor above the dissolv-ing 
dais, and the cauldron was there with her. She glowed more 
brightly. Her rainbow vortex spun into the depths of the Kral 
and started something to sparkling and tinkling down there. 
The black tide went splashing back to menace its creator. 
Aluteyn cried out. A great thing like a hammer of night 
came smashing down on Mercy and the Kral. But this creation 
of the Craftsmaster, like the other, frittered away to impotence. 
Mercy's rainbow tornado now rose from the cauldron and grew 
until it was more than four times the height of the Lord Creator. 
It began to show thickening clots of multicolored light. Aluteyn 
caught it in a huge black net and pounded it with psychoener-gies, 
trying to force it back into the kettle or turn it upon the 
woman. But it eluded him. It expanded and solidified high 
above the heads of the throng ... 
And manna rained on Tanu and Firvulag and humans alike, 
The air was filled with a soft hailstorm of rainbow bubbles, 
countless thousands of them, which when seized and broken 
open released sweetmeats, cold fruits, rich little cakes, and a 
whole cornucopia of other delicious edibles that were greeted.with jubilant enthusiasm by the 
famished spectators of all three 
races. 
"Slonshal, Rosmar! Slonshal, Rosmar Lady Creator! Slon-shal!" 
She stood with lowered eyes, having fully restored the dais, 
with one silver hand resting on the brim of the empty cauldron. 
The mob was still yelling and grabbing, for never before at the 
Grand Combat had any creator produced fully tangible organic 
matter that endured instead of quickly fading away. (Mercy's 
astral hors d'oeuvres were far from illusory; the stomachs of 
the throng testified to it!) And so her talent was hailed not only 
for its novelty but also for its practical value. 
"I delegate," she said at last in a small clear voice, "Lord 
Velteyn of Finiah as Second Creator, to defend our Guild's 
honor in the Grand Combat." 
The Tanu contingent made such a bedlam hailing the be-reaved 
former ruler—now presented with a perfect means of 
restoring his damaged prestige—that few heard the second part 
of Mercy's speech: 
"And I call upon Aluteyn, late President of the Creator 
Guild, to choose between exile from this noble company or 
life-offering to our compassionate Goddess." 
"I choose the offering," said proud Aluteyn. Virtually un-noticed, 
he walked without escort to the Great Retort and joined 
the other condemned ones who waited inside. 

Mayvar Kingmaker stood forth unchallenged as leader of 
the Farsensor Guild. None were surprised when she designated 
Aiken Drum to lead the Guild's fighters, rather than the Host's 
nominee, the female warrior Riganone. Finally Thagdal the 
High King came forward, proclaiming Nodonn to be Tanu 
Battlemaster, and the manifestations ended. 
With one last thundering cheer, the crowd dispersed to the 
two tent-cities that now stood on either side of the Well of the 
Sea. There they would spend the rest of the day and most of 
the night in feasting, drinking, and amusement, until dawn 
would begin the Third Day of the Grand Combat and the open-ing 
skirmish of the ritual war. 
Some eight hundred kilometers to the west of the White 
Silver Plain, scorpions and spiders and alkali ants that lived 
on the slopes above the Alboran Basin were drowning by the.millions. Small flying predators such 
as wasps and brown-flies 
survived longer, keeping ahead of the creeping saltwater until 
night coolness loaded their wing membranes with condensation 
and forced them down..7 
IT LACKED A FEW MINUTES UNTIL SUNRISE. THE ARMIES CON-fronted 
one another, poised and ready. 
The overwhelming numbers of Firvulag were on foot as 
always, dancing and leaping in undisciplined mobs around the 
battle-captains of their choice like great black-armored insects. 
The effigy standards with festoons of gilded skulls bounced up 
and down, daring the Foe to seize them—for in this manner, 
as well as in the taking of heads, was the Grand Combat victory 
judged. The Little People were armed with dark glittering 
swords, spiked clubs, chain-flails, and halberds with odd-shaped 
blades. They carried no bows and arrows or other projectile 
weapons, these, as well as the war-steeds, being contrary to 
their traditions of battle. Many of them had spears; but they 
were accustomed to fling these at the Foe rather than thrust, 
and so the weapons usually caused little damage to the heavily 
armored Tanu riders and mounts. 
A few Firvulag could not resist shape-shifting in anticipation 
of the Melee. A ghastly winged serpent shot up amidst the 
cohort commanded by Karbree the Worm. In another part of 
the field, a stinking explosion heralded the temporary appear-ance 
of a cyclopean horror that splattered the salt with foul 
ichor, prompting obscene protests from its indignant comrades-inarms. 
Out near the lagoonside flank, a formless mass of 
yellowy-green protoplasm went rolling and bumping along, 
hooting like an insane calliope. 
The Tanu force faced this trollish rabble with dignity and 
splendor. In the front ranks, armored in bronze and glass and 
bearing colorful pennons, were the troops of gray-torc cavalry 
and the human charioteers; all were armed with bows, spears, 
and blades, and responsive to the mental commands of their.hybrid and gold-torc human officers. 
Behind them the five great 
battalions of the metapsychic guilds sat their steeds, both war-riors 
and chalikos aglow with near-florescent brilliance. The 
coercers and psychokinetics were most numerous, the creators 
somewhat fewer in number, and the farsensors and combatant 
redactors constituted the smallest units, since most of their 
membership undertook support roles during this part of the 
Grand Combat. 
Contingents from the various Tanu cities gathered around 
local champions bearing banners that must not fall into the 
hands of the Foe. Certain knights of high repute had their own 
adherents, Tanu and human; and besides the golds and silvers 

there were among them numerous glass-armored grays who 
had proven themselves in the Low Melee. Later, when the 
battle heated up, the regional groups and even the guild seg-regation 
would be abandoned as fighters gathered to follow the 
banner and mental commands of the heroes who acquitted them-selves 
most valiantly—and also showed the most powerful 
defensive shielding ability. The royalty and field generals of 
Tanu and Firvulag stood well apart at this early stage, ready 
to observe and evaluate strategy and commend noteworthy feats. 
The sky above the Great Lagoon was golden. As the upper 
limb of the sun appeared, there was a vivid green flash that 
persisted for a full twenty seconds before dissolving into white 
dazzle. "Omen! Omen!" Screeching like banshees, the Firvulag horde 
leaped forward. Their mailed feet raised a din that caused the 
salt to tremble. 
The Tanu waited in arrogant rainbow array, banners high 
and chalikos held firmly in check. 
The sunlight strengthened. Nodonn Battlemaster rose into 
the air mounted on his armored charger, blazing to rival the" 
solar disk. His mind and storm-loud voice sounded the ancient 
Tanu war cry: 
"Na bardito!" 
Glass trumpets held by the fighting women blared. Seven thousand gem-studded shields rang like 
bells as they were struck 
with the flat of vitredur swords. The uncouth bellowing of the 
Firvulag was overwhelmed as the tall exotics and their human 
allies repeated the cry. 
"No bardito! Na bardito taynel o pogekone! Forward, fight- ers of the Many-Colored Land!" 
The armies swept together, beginning the three-day en-.counter of massed minds and weapons. The 
clash of their meet-ing 
could be heard far away on the Mount of Heroes by those 
who had ears to hear. 
"This year it will be different!" Sharn-Mes had vowed to 
Pallol. 
The Firvulag Battlemaster, clothed in his illusionary guise 
of a monstrous black otter having six legs, flaming fangs and 
claws, and a coruscant opal the size of a dinnerplate lidding 
his Eye, professed scepticism. But then, he had not been there 
at Finiah! 
The young general and the old, surrounded by aides and 
cronies, watched from behind a formidable screen as the early 
skirmishes took place. But after the first hour, even Pallol had 
to admit that the Little People were handling themselves with 
singular eclat. There was a marvelous and fresh sense of valor 
among them. Finiah had lifted their spirits—and even more, 
it had opened them to new ideas. 
Sharn, wearing the shape of a three-meter albino scorpion, 
all waxy translucent, with glowing organs in his body cavities, 
pointed out an impending engagement with his farsense. 
"They're coming close to us, Battlemaster. But no more 
tactical retreats now! Just you watch our lads when the Lowlife 
cavalry charges!" 
A troop of gray-torcs came galloping hell for leather, ready 
to cut and trample a tight phalanx of some sixty Firvulag, who 
appeared to be making their customary stubborn and futile 
stand. But on this occasion, just before the mounts' pounding 
claws slashed down on the mound of overlapping black shields, 
the foot-soldiery scattered and went dodging among the tall 
animals, slashing at unarmored bellies with pole-knives, or 
swinging axes at the vulnerable leg tendons of the chalikos. 
"I'll be damned!" interjected Pallol. 

The gray-torc charge disintegrated. Hamstrung and mortally 
wounded steeds threw their riders and then staggered, scream-ing 
and tripping over their own gushing bowels, until they 
died. There were still the unhorsed humans to contend with; 
but in hand-to-hand combat the superior numbers of the Little 
People gave them the advantage, even though the grays were 
often physically stronger and compelled to fight to the death 
by their banner-carrying officers. Visions of battling goblins 
and other ghoulies and ghosties came and went in the midst of 
the struggle. The aether throbbed with hideous mental projec-.tions. The gold-torc human officer 
in coercer blue managed to zap out and hack to death half a dozen of the Firvulag before 
disappearing beneath a pile of stalwarts, but it was plain to see where the advantage lay now. 
"That belly-sticking maneuver's not bad," Pallol had to ad- mit. "The humans used it at Finiah," 
Sharn said. "It was an innovation of some Lowlife metalcrafter who acted as an ad hoc leader. He 
said later that the tactic was traditional among members of his ancestral ethnic group. The 
hamstringing was 
suggested by a Lowlife holy woman, of all people. She had seen it used by the terrible Morigel in 
her murder of Epone." "Morigel? The Raven—? Oh, you mean that human mon- ster, Felice." Pallol 
shook his fierce carnivore head. "Te be thanked that one's out of the picture! Rumor has it she 
escaped the clutches of Handsome Cull and flew away in a big ball of scalding-hot blood. Damn 
superstitious claptrap! But wherever she's gone, I hope she stays there." 
The Firvulag had finished butchering the last of the cavalry 
troop, and now raised thirty severed heads, still in crested bronze helmets, at the ends of their 
lances. One head wearing 
a blue-glass burgonet with draggled golden plumes was impaled on the pike of its own standard. The 
visor of the helmet was open and the dead eyes seemed to look down on the bloodied azure banner 
with mild astonishment. 
The phalanx of Little People came rushing up to the knot 
of leaders. "Manifest, Battlemaster!" howled the dwarfs, danc- ing around Pallol and Sharn. 
"Manifest—like in the good old days!" "You fellows... I'm prouder'n hell of you!" croaked the 
demon otter, swallowing a lump in his throat. "You bet I'll 
manifest for you!" He lifted the opal lid from his Eye and zapped the waving heads to white bone. 
The skulls flew up and spun like a swarm 
of meteors just over the cheering warriors' speartops, then swooped down to land in a pyramidal 
pile on the sidelines, surmounted by the disgraced blazon. Every one of the skulls 
now was plated with gleaming gold, ready to be picked up by the trophy makers. "Slitsal, Pallol!" 
yelped the phalanx. Brandishing their freshly cleaned weapons, they went dashing off to seek a new 
en- gagement with the Foe. * * *.In a tangled heap lay two Firvulag bodies and one human being 
only pretending to be dead, the latter praying that he 
would be able to hold out until sundown, when it might still 
be possible for him to desert. With great caution, Raimo Hakkinen groped again in the region of 
his high-rising rump. Once more there was only the 
dull ching of a glass-plated gauntlet striking the skirt of artic-ulated 
tassets that armored his derriere. Damn! Forget again. 
He had no hip pocket. He had no flask of good old Hudson's 
Bay Demerara. No water, even. Nothing to drink at all unless 
you fancied blood. From the ventilating slot in the visor of his 
pink-glass sallet came a faint sob. It went unheard in the battle 
tumult all around him... 
They'd had to coerce him into it, of course. Those giggling Tanu she-fiends had dragged him away 
from 
the War Banquet and stripped his poor emaciated husk of a 
body right in the middle of the armorer's showroom while they 
selected a suitable PK harness for him. A gray squire had 
snickered while dressing him in the undergarments: first a cot-ton 
singlet and briefs, then the beautifully engineered suit of 
padding, tough woven-gauze fabric enclosing pea-sized plass 
bubbles, fully protective, airy, and weighing only a few grams. 
The six exotic women themselves had strapped on all the sliding 
plates of gold-chased pink glass, telling him how brave he was 
going to be and how gloriously he would prove himself on the 

White Silver Plain. Armored to the neck, he had to kneel before 
them while they mockingly dubbed him "Lord Raimo" with a 
big sword of rosy vitredur. Then he was forced to pleasure all 
of them in the only way left to him, and after that humiliation 
was over they clapped on the magnificent crested helmet that 
rather resembled a visored sou'wester, sheathed his sword in 
a scabbard hanging at his side, and hustled him outside to the skittish armored charger all ready 
to bear him off to battle. The 
chaliko had its coat dyed a violent fuchsia with acid-yellow 
mane and fetlock featherings, a parody of the Psychokinetic 
Guild's heraldic rose and gold. When the women teleported 
him into the saddle he barely had time to grab the reins before 
the great brute reared, nearly flinging him ass over teakettle 
backward. 
Somehow he stayed aboard and was rewarded with six sep-arate 
zonks on his silver torc's joy-buzzer. 
They all trotted over to the Plain together from the Tanu 
encampment, joining the vast parade of bejeweled fighters and.well-wishers streaming along the 
torch-lit and bannered avenue in the gray false dawn. The six ladies waxed symphonic on his 
happy-circuits to work him up to a fine pitch of euphoria; and 
when they reached the staging area of the battlefield they 
switched abruptly to the hypothalamic trigger, charging him 
with adrenalin and insane hostility toward the Firvulag Foe that 
lurked less than a kilometer away in the murk. He joined the 
Muriah-town ranks of his fellow silver PKers, hyped to the eyeballs with battle ardor. Then the 
army waited in place for another whole hour. And 
with the passing of time and the withdrawal of the women to 
the distant sidelines his frenzy weakened and what remained 
of sanity began to assert itself. He discovered that the Tanu 
witches had forgotten to turn control of their man-toy over to 
Kuhal or Fian or some other officer of the PK battalion. He 
was unfettered! No one was coercing him any more! 
When the charge sounded at last and he was off and running, 
waving his sword with the amok multitude and yelling with 
both voices, he was cold sober and scared out of his mamareamin' 
mind. At first, his chaliko saved him. It was a well-trained destrier, for all its evil 
temper, and it knew how to lash out with its 
claws whenever members of the Firvulag infantry came running 
at them. Raimo charged in a middle Tanu echelon, between 
the elite grays and the splendid ranks of provincial champions. 
By the time he was in the thick of the fighting there was enough 
dust and shape-shifting and preliminary slaughter going on to 
keep his erstwhile comrades occupied with matters other than him. 
It was time to think about escape. 
He wheeled about, slashing at the air and hiding behind his 
shield when illusionary monsters loomed up in the uncertain sunrise glare. Waves of Firvulaggenerated 
terror swirled around 
him and blended with his own home-grown funk. He rode 
through a nightmarish hullabaloo where the combatants of both 
armies flashed into and out of view like images on a fritzed 
holo-projector. Only one aspect of the war was relentlessly 
real—the headless bodies, mostly human and Firvulag, and 
the dying animals staining the salt with sticky crimson and hot 
excrement. Once he raised the visor of his helmet and vomited with discretion so as not to spook 
his mount. For the most part, the 
tall beast stepped carefully among the corpses while he tried.to guide it in the direction of the 
ascending sun, which looked 
like a cut-out white disk heavily curtained in dusty haze. In 
that direction lay the eastern arm of the lagoon. If he reached 
the shore, it might be possible to swipe one of the Firvulag 
boats; and if his broken-down PK had a few watts left, he just 

might make it to Kersic. 
Luck. Just a little luck. Didn't he deserve some after these 
months of living hell? Just keep up the good work, Horsie, and 
kick! Kick the crap outa those little turdlings when they come 
at us! 
The chaliko fought well. And the Firvulag, he discovered, 
only threw their lances and never made use of arrows or darts, 
so he was fairly secure behind his shield in the high saddle 
until— 
Something like a gigantic purple spider came scuttling out 
of the misty dazzle and got behind him. One of its appendages 
thrust up under the armored tailpiece of the chaliko's crupper. 
The animal let out an earsplitting scream and fell heavily for-ward, 
impaled by some kind of long-shafted pole-arm. Raimo 
was pitched from the saddle and hit the ground with a sound 
like a demolished xylophone. He saw the spider waver and 
dissolve, and then, cavorting around and around him and chor-tling 
in a falsetto squeal was a Firvulag in gore-smeared half-armor— 
the spitting image of Grumpy the Dwarf in Disney's 
2-D cinema classic. 
"Now I gotcha! Now I gotcha!" the manikin shrilled, waving 
a black glassy blade with a terrible notched edge. 
"Help!" Raimo cried. He tried vainly to rise. His chaliko 
thrashed in death agonies, its great claws almost on top of him. 
Helphelphelpkelp... 
Sweet houghmagandy, Chopper! That you? 
Aik! Aik, for the love o'Christ! 
A beam resembling that from a sodium-vapor searchlight 
stabbed from the clouds of dust. It flicked harmlessly over the 
collapsed pink knight, but when it detected Grumpy it steadied 
and intensified. The Firvulag warrior's limbs flew out in spasm 
and his obsidian sword arced away. Orange-yellow light licked 
up and down the exotic body, melting the cuirass and leaving 
a path of smoking wound. The Firvulag uttered piercing shrieks. 
A voice out of thin air said, "That's a good fix," and the astral 
beam swiveled to shine into the transfixed dwarf's open mouth. 
There was a small, exceedingly nasty explosion.."Open your eyes, Chopper. Your shining knight has 
come to the rescue." 
Still prone, Raimo tilted up his visor. A huge black chaliko 
all armored in gold looked down at him, its benign eyes peering from the openings of a gilded 
chamfron. It had a monocerine faceted spike of amethyst mounted on its forehead. Sitting the 
magnificent beast was a diminutive human glowing as from a 
self-contained power source. He carried no weapon, no shield. But he held high a purple banner 
whose golden-hand blazon gave the finger to the Exile world. A black-and-viotet cape rippled 
unstained about Aiken Drum's gold-lustre armor. He 
grinned as he PK-hoisted Raimo to his feet. "There you go, Chopper. Good as new and ready to raise 
hell! See you later!" "Wait—" the former woodsman pleaded. But the Shining One was gone. The 
battle noise intensified and so did the clouds 
of smoke and dust. It sounded as though some desperate en-gagement 
were coming right at him. 
He stumbled about until he recovered his sword and buckler. 
Avoiding the thrashing chaliko and the fearful mess that had been Grumpy, he started off in the 
direction opposite from the worst of the psychocreative detonations, away from the clang 
of glass and bronze weapons, the bellowing of thousands of 
human and inhuman voices that filled his ears and mind. Within a few minutes he was completely 
disoriented. There was no 
clue to show him the way to the shore, no sure route to escape. "What am I gonna do?" he 
whimpered. 
Survive until sunset, something reminded him, and there 
would be a recess of three hours while the field was cleared 
of the wounded and the dead. If he could manage to hide until 

then— He tripped over the two decapitated Firvulag and stopped 
his aimless flight. There was no natural cover on the Plain— 
so why not? Still shrouded in thick dust clouds, he flung himself 
down and burrowed among their dark-dripping limbs. Then he 
withdrew his consciousness into that inadequate little closet of 
refuge Aiken had taught him to use when the women drove 
him to the brink of madness. Unless someone beamed a thought 
right at him, he was safe. Almost all sensation, almost all pain 
ceased. Raimo Hakkinen waited. 
The sun climbed high, heating the White Silver Plain and generating rising air currents that 
lifted the pall of dust. The 
warriors of both sides renewed hostilities. Great deeds of her-.oism were accomplished by Tanu and 
Firvulag alike, but the gray-torc levies were being decimated by the new tactics of 
the Little People, which placed the Tanu in a potentially dan-gerous 
position. 
Raimo lay unmoving, even though some skirmishes took place only a few meters away from him. He 
suffered cramps 
and heat and thirst. Flies descended to feast on the blood and 
lay their eggs in dead flesh, and some of them crept into his 
helmet. Rousing from his stupor for a moment, he used the 
shreds of his psychokinetic power to squash them against the 
insides of the sallet. From time to time he groped deliriously 
for booze. The fuchsia and yellow feathers of his helmut crest 
shaded him slightly, but he still broiled in his shell of pink 
glass until late afternoon when the sun declined at long last 
and silhouetted the spine of Aven against blood-red light before 
it disappeared. 
A single horn sounded a silvery note that reverberated in 
his mind. 
The noises of battle faded. A wind of luxuriant coolness 
came rushing over the salt. The armies withdrew. 
Soon, Raimo told himself. Soon—when it was a bit darker. 
He was wide-awake now but still lying motionless. Unfor-tunately, 
he had concealed himself in a spot precariously close 
to the huge Tanu encampment. Redactors and farsensors on 
missions of mercy were spreading out onto the quiet Plain, 
guiding bearers to the wounded Tanu and human knights. And 
there were others as well, leaders mounted on fresh chalikos 
assessing the results of the first daylight action. If any of them 
detected him—! 
He tried to suppress all thought projection, shrinking back 
into his little skull-closet. I am a dead thing let me be I am 
dead pass me by ignore me go away go away... "Oh, you are, are you?" 
The voice was in his mind and ear. He refused to open his 
eyes. 
Laughter. "Come on now, Psychokinetic Brother. You don't 
look as badly wounded as all that!" 
The Firvulag bodies, those precious sheltering bodies, shifted. 
He began to slip down onto the salt; but someone held his head, 
compelling him to look out through the opened visor of his 
sallet. 
Two Tanu women—one in purple, one in redactor's red 
and silver. Behind them, a pair of stolid male barenecks with.a litter. The stiffened Firvulag 
corpses lay like discarded head- less mannequins beside him. 
"He is not wounded at all, Sister," said the farsensor. Her 
deep-eyed face was grim and shadowed beneath the hood of her cloak. "It's true," the redactor 
confirmed. "His mind also is un-touched 
by the Foe. He is a malingerer. A craven!" 
In a panic, Raimo scrambled to his feet. The cramped mus-cles 
of his legs refused to hold him up. He fell—and then the 
full force of Tanu coercion flowed from both women to his 

torc and held him in thrall. He stood perfectly still, a statue 
encased in jeweled pink plates crusted with other people's blood. "You know the penalty for 
cowardice, Lowlife," said the 
farsensor. 
He had to reply, "Yes, Exalted Lady." 
"Go to the place then. Go where you belong!" 
He turned from them and began to trudge across the battle-field, 
to where the Great Retort of glass stood waiting on its 
high scaffold. 
Seven hundred kilometers to the west, the body of a young 
plesiosaur lay stranded on the rocks of the Alboran Volcano. 
It had been hunting tunny-fish in the Atlantic, oblivious to 
any danger. And the tunnies themselves were chasing flying 
squid, and the squid in their turn had pursued a shoal of silver 
sardines that had been browsing upon the microscopic orga-nisms 
of pelagic plankton. The unexpected current had seized 
them all, large creatures and small, and sucked them into the 
Gibraltar rift. 
For a hellish quarter of an hour they had been buffeted and 
churned and then they were flung over the incredible waterfall. 
The young plesiosaur's graceful neck snapped as it impacted 
into the foaming pother of the new Mediterranean Sea. It died 
instantly. The tunnies, torn and battered against submerged 
rocks, succumbed not long afterward, as did the squid. Because 
of their small size, most of the sardines managed to traverse 
the falls shocked but physically unharmed. When their brains 
regained a measure of equanimity they attempted to go about 
life as usual, but the turbulent water filling the Alboran Basin 
was so full of silt that their tiny gills were clogged and every 
one of them suffocated. Of all the creatures that had been pulled 
through the newborn Straits of Gibraltar, only the hardy plank-ton 
survived..The body of the plesiosaur had floated eastward until it came 
ashore on a slope of the Alboran Volcano that had once stood 
600 meters above the floor of the adjacent dry basin. Gulls and carrion crows feasted on the 
carcass before the rising flood reclaimed it and set it adrift again in the misty dark..8 
IN THE RECESS BEFORE DAWN, NODONN FLEW OVER THE BAT-tlefield 
with Imidol and Kuhal and Culluket, studying the dis-mal 
results of the first round of the High Melee. The nearly 
full moon was setting and the stars shone dim. In keeping with 
their mood, the four brothers had dulled their own metapsychic 
illumination and rode the sky like wraiths. 
Firvulag medics, firefly lanterns bobbing, were busy among 
the masses of dark bodies. Over in their camp was a great circle 
of bonfires signaling a warrior's collation in progress. The Little 
People were singing a loud polyphonic chant, punctuated by 
throbbing drums. 
"I don't recall hearing that one," Imidol remarked. 
"One of their fight songs," Kuhal said sourly. "The kind 
they sang when they used to win every other Combat back in 
the days when you were still clinging to Mother's skirts and 
learning to coerce black beetles. The song's a victory lay, 
actually. Let's hope it's premature." 
"That they should dare to voice it at all—!" Culluket's face 
blazed momentarily crimson. 
"We're not even behind in the banner tally," Imidol pro-tested. 
"It was a shame about Velteyn, but Celadeyr of Afaliah 
can take over his Creator Battalion." 
"What's left of it," Kuhal snarled. 
The Battlemaster had offered no observation. Now he led 
them lower, to a large area where the scarlet-and-violet glow 
of Tanu agents of succor had concentrated. He said, "Velteyn 

was an impetuous fool to underestimate Pallol. He of all our 
battle-captains should have known the new mood of the Foe. 
And do not minimize the disaster, Youngest Brother! The ranks.of the creators have been reduced by 
fully one-quarter of their 
number—and Celadeyr is not one of the Host." 
Culluket was a shade too neutral. "Well, it was your idea 
to have Mercy designate Vel as Second Creator. I warned you 
about his impaired judgmental outlook." "And now," the truculent Kuhal appended, "our late brother 
of Finiah overlooks the Firvulag revels! Doubtless from empty, 
gold-socketed eyes." "We have two more rounds," Imidol said, radiating confi-dence. 
"This fiasco with the gray-torc cavalry was a fluke. 
We'll bounce back." "The Skin pavilions are overflowing," Culluket warned. "I've been considering 
that," said Nodonn. "The most se- riously wounded Tanu and human golds will have to be transferred 
to the healing rooms up in Redact House so that the field 
medics can devote their skills to patching up the battleworthy. 
We will undertake a second innovation as well. Culluket— 
you will farspeak the Lord Healer and instruct him to begin 
admitting the best of the fighting grays to the Skin. The wounded incompetents of our own race 
must resign themselves to sitting 
out the rest of the Combat in Muriah. We'll have no time for 
aging has-beens and bunglers in this war." 
"Tana's teeth, Brother!" Kuhal exclaimed. "Thaggy will supernova if you go against tradition like 
that!" 
Nodonn was adamant. "Our customs can stand a little bend- ing. We have more to worry about than 
the injured pride of 
traditionalists—or even the Kingly honor. I admit now that I 
made a serious mistake putting Velteyn in a position of com-mand. 
I was moved by sentiment, and you saw how popular 
his designation was at the time." 
"Celadeyr is a good leader, even if he isn't of the Host," Kuhal said. "But we've lost a sure High 
Table candidate in Velteyn, and we'll have to look sharp from now o n ... And 
I'm talking to you, Youngest Brother!" 
Imidol blustered, "I'll take care of Leyr when the time's ripe! You just watch your own 
psychokinetic ass, Brother!" 
The eastern sky was deep violet. Venus hung over the gun-metal 
smoothness of the lagoon. 
"This day," Nodonn told the three, "we must all take great care. The battalions will be 
fragmenting as the pressure of battle builds and the Firvulag Great Ones emerge to do personal 
combat. With so many grays and creators gone, we are even 
further outnumbered—but we still have the advantage in total.mindpower. When you take to the field 
yourselves, be more prudent than our luckless brother, Velteyn. He erred in trying 
to gather outguild fighters to his personal banner too early by 
means of spectacular but foolhardy tactics. He gambled and 
lost. But let me remind you that there is another gambler fight-ing 
amongst our ranks... and he is playing a masterclass game 
for the highest possible stakes." 
The four brothers talked over technicalities for some time 
after that, letting their steeds drift in the dawning. Down below, 
the Plain was being cleared rapidly. Firvulag dead were loaded 
into special coracles on the lagoon strand, to be immolated on 
the water during the return journey of the Little People to the 
mainland of Europe. The headless Tanu and human bodies were 
shrouded and stacked beneath the glass box of the Great Retort, 
where they would fuel the distillation of the imprisoned in the 
ultimate Combat offering of life and death. 
For a hundred years, the eggs of the brine shrimp and the 
spores of minute algae had waited for rain. 
Safe beneath the cracked saline crust of the playa, they had 
husbanded their tiny portions of life-force, resisting heat and 
drought and chemical action until yet another extraordinary 

once-in-a-century rainstorm should drench the Pliocene Betic 
Cordillera, swell the Proto-Andarax River, and fill the Great 
Brackish Marsh to overflowing. 
Then for a few short weeks the thousands of square kilo-meters 
of dry lakebeds that lay between the normal western 
boundaries of the marsh and the gentle Alboran Rise would 
burst into teeming life. The brine shrimp and the algae and a 
few other hardy aquatic forms would thrive until the waters 
drained and evaporated away, leaving fresh eggs and spores 
entombed in the sediment to await the next Hundred-Year Storm. 
No rain fell. The Pliocene sky of early November was clear 
and the bed of the Andarax carried only a thin trickle from the 
Spanish heights into the basin of the Mediterranean. 
Nevertheless, the playa filled. The water spread and deep-ened 
in a manner unprecedented. 
Brine shrimp hatched by the billions, ate algae, and hastened 
to lay the softer-shelled eggs that they produced in a well-watered 
environment. The water was muddier than usual and 
it harbored alien competitors, oceanic plankton that vied with 
the shrimp for the drifting greenery and even tried to prey upon 
the little crustaceans themselves. But the creatures of the playa.had no true awareness of that, 
nor of the fact that they would never have to endure the long drought-sleep again. 
"Trust me!" said Aiken Drum, amid the fire, smoke, mind- bellowing, and carnage. "If this doesn't 
work," Bunone Warteacher told him, "there's a good chance that Nukalavee will nail you." Aiken 
jabbed his saucy banner skyward. "Fear not! Just keep your fewkin' illusions intact and see that 
none of the gang here tries any heroic chivalrous bullshit to louse up the ambush. 
You hear me talkin', Tagan baby?" 
The Lord of Swords said dryly, "We are so menaced by the Foe that I will bow to any expedient 
giving promise of reprieve. Even to you, Aiken Drum." "Attaboy, Coercive Brother! Look sharp, 
then. I'm off!" The golden figure on the magnificent charger vanished in a puff of purple smoke. 
Lord Daral of Bardelask said, "Have confidence, Lord of Swords. Aiken has led us with brave 
ingenuity all this day. We have more than twoscore of the Firvulag battle standards 
through following his banner—as well as the head of their hero, Bles Four-Fang!" 
"Lying in ambush isn't our way," grumbled Tagan. 
"It's a way to win," Bunone shot back. "You old soldiers 
give me a pain in the—heads up!" 
Out of the dusty imbroglio surrounding the six depleted Tanu companies emerged a new sound—an 
infuriated roar from 
more than a thousand throats, carrying over it a whistling squeal 
that reminded the human fighters of a king of Brobdingnagian 
electronic feedback. In an instant, all of the five hundred or 
so mounted knights disappeared, transformed into piles of mis- cellaneous corpses lying on both 
sides of a fairly clear corridor 
perhaps thirty meters in width and nearly ten times as long. 
"The illusion is firm," Celadeyr told them. "And now—en 
garde!" 
Into the cleared area came galloping a hipparion, one of the 
donkey-sized three-toed horses of the Pliocene Epoch. It was 
bridled and plumed and caparisoned with purple and gold gar- niture. Standing upon its back, 
waving a small-sized version 
of his digitus impudicus banner and laughing like a maniac, 
was Aiken Drum. He was wearing his golden suit of many pockets. Charging hot on his trail was a 
legion of monsters, Firvulag.stalwarts clad in their most fearsome illusions, led by a towering 
apparition resembling a centaur from which the skin had been 
flayed. Its raw muscles and sinews and red and blue blood 
vessels glistened and throbbed; the eyeballs started from its 
skull in frenzied rage; a lipless mouth with broken tusks gaped 
as it voiced its appalling scream. Nukalavee the Skinless, one 
of the premier Firvulag champions, pursued the small figure 
on horseback, flinging lightning balls that hit some invisible 
metapsychic barrier around the fleeing jester and exploded into 

harmlessness. 
"Nyaa-nyaa!" cried Aiken Drum. 
The hipparion galloped flat out. The youth bent to peer 
backwards through his legs and stick his tongue out at Nuka-lavee, 
clinging to the reins with one hand and flourishing his 
midget banner with the other. Then he dropped the flap of his 
golden suit. 
Nukalavee's feedback howl soared to a hundred and ten 
decibels. The trampling Firvulag mob came to be entirely en-compassed 
by the twin lines of corpses. 
Bunone and Alberonn and Bleyn gave a simultaneous mental 
command: Now. 
"Wake up, Bryan. Can you hear me? Wake up now." 
The dream of darkness began to fade, that cavern swallow-ing 
him with sweet and awful finality. He opened his eyes and 
there were Fred and Mario, the silver-torc redactors who had 
been his warders. And there was Creyn, now setting aside a 
small golden censer from which lingering acrid fumes swirled. 
"I'm quite all right," Bryan said. (But soon to return to be 
engulfed.) 
The deepset exotic eyes with their flat-blue pupils were very 
close to him. "Tana be thanked, Bryan. We had feared for 
you." 
Good old Creyn was concerned. But why? She had promised 
to come for him. 
"You have been asleep for three days, Bryan." 
"It doesn't matter, really." 
"No," the Tanu healer replied in gentle agreement. "I sup-pose 
it doesn't. But you must rise and prepare yourself now. 
Mario and Frederic will help you dress appropriately. It's time 
for you to leave Redact House. In an hour, after the sun sets, 
we will have the second Recess Before Night. There is to be.a gathering of the entire Tanu battlecompany 
in extraordinary 
conclave. You are summoned to the White Silver Plain." 
Bryan managed a slight smile. "Another command perfor-mance 
before Their Awful Majesties? I should think they'd 
have... more diverting entertainment these days than the likes 
of me." 
"You are summoned by Nodonn," Creyn said. He extended 
one bony hand all covered with rings and lightly touched the 
fingers of the still recumbent anthropologist. "You have no torc 
and so I cannot reach you in the fullness of fellowship, nor 
heal you even if it were allowed, or possible. You are unaware 
of what you have done, and in Tana's mercy you may never 
know. So go, Bryan. Receive your last gift. Goodbye." 
Bryan's wondering gaze followed the exotic man to the door of the suite. And then Creyn was gone 
and Fred and Mario 
were helping him into the sumptuous bathroom. 
"They weren't listening to me!" Bewildered, Thagdal sank 
back into his throne. 
The banqueting pavilion was a turmoil of conflicting thoughts 
and shouts. Nobody was sitting formally at table any more; 
they were jumping up on top of them to deliver impromptu 
harangues; or gathered around this champion or that, consum-ing 
heroic quantities of liquor as they debated and quarreled 
about the remarkable events of the day, the Tanu comeback in 
the face of lengthening odds and what—or who—had been 
responsible for it. 
"I thought it was a lovely speech, dear," Nontusvel assured 
him. "Setting differences aside and all working together. What 
could be more logical?" 

The King only gave a hollow laugh and drank from his 
gilded-skull goblet. Morosely, he stared into the inset carbuncle 
eyes. 
"Remember this good old boy? Maglarn Wrinkle-Meat. Ug-liest 
mother's son of the whole Firvulag tribe, and a fighting 
fool. I finally zapped him through the gizzard after we'd wal-loped 
each other for three mortal hours in the Heroic Encoun-ters. 
Now that was Combat! None of this hole-in-a-corner 
sneaking around and dirty tricks. But now—! The Foe fights 
dirty, and so do we. And unless some miracle supervenes, the 
dirtiest trickster of the lot will end up King of the Many-Colored 
Land."."Here's Nodonn," Nontusvel said softly. "He has... brought 
someone with him." 
The King looked up and uttered a mild blasphemy. "I might have known who had that anthropologist 
stashed away! My 
boys combed the whole city and half of Aven and couldn't find 
hide nor hair of him." 
Nontusvel regarded her husband with sorrow. "But they 
found poor Ogmol, didn't they?" 
The royal beard sparked ominously. "You're an innocent, 
Nonnie. I was trying to save us all." 
The arrival of the Battlemaster inspired cheers from the 
thousands of feasters, and a single impudent nyaa. Nodonn 
made his duty to his parents with accustomed serenity and then 
took Bryan around to a prominent position in front of the High 
Table. The human scientist appeared dazed; an odd smile touched 
his lips and from time to time one of his hands strayed to his 
open collar, from which came a telltale golden gleam. 
"Noble battle-company!" intoned the storm-loud voice. The 
chain of silence was not needed. "We have suffered defeats in 
this Grand Combat.. .and victories!" 
Plaudits and groans and not a few drunken curses. 
"The first round of the High Melee saw us faced with disaster 
when our gray-torc cavalry and charioteers faltered in the face 
of novel tactics from the Foe. The misfortune was compounded 
when the commanders of the gray levies, half-bloods and gold-torcs, 
as we know, failed to rally their troops according to the 
tenets of our ancient battle-religion." 
Catcalls and shouting of indignant denials, mingled with 
taunting epithets and a scattering of "Shame!" 
The Battlemaster held up one mailed fist. "Let those deny 
it who will! The ranks of humankind were shattered. And as 
a consequence we suffered grave setbacks. The blame, how-ever, 
lies not with humanity, fellow warriors of the Tanu, but 
with ourselves!" 
The hubbub, which had been swelling in intensity, suddenly 
fell away to silence. 
"We have come to depend overmuch upon humanity in our 
Grand Combat. We have become lax and decadent as we adopted 
first their domesticated animals as battle-mounts, and then their 
very selves. Yes... we adopted humanity. They fight our bat-tles, 
they grow our food, they operate our mines and factories, 
they administer our commerce, they infiltrate our sacred guilds, 
they mingle their very blood and genes with our own! But that.is not all. We are faced with the 
ultimate humiliation—and 
once again, we have brought it upon ourselves. For a human 
now aspires to our High Kingship!" 
In all the vast tent there was no sound. And then came the 
mighty bellow of Celadeyr, Lord of Afaliah: "And is this to 
our shame, Battlemaster? When Aiken Drum goes himself to 
meet the Foe, unarmed and unafraid, while certain Exalted 

Personages rest secure behind impregnable screens, dithering 
about antiquated tactics that no longer dismay the Firvulag— 
much less defeat them?" 
A thunderclap of mental and vocal shouting greeted this 
sally. Celadeyr added, "The Foe has consorted with humans. 
This is how Finiah fell. This is how their pikemen learned to 
devastate our cavalry. Shall we then return to the ancient ways 
you champion and all lose our heads—rejoicing that at least 
our honor is intact? Or shall we follow this golden youth, the 
chosen of Mayvar, and know victory?" 
This time the outcry made the very walls and ceiling of the 
pavilion billow and the cups and plates dance on the tables. 
The face of Apollo was apparently unmoved; but Nodonn was 
now glowing so furiously that those closest to the High Table 
fell back, shielding their eyes from the rose-gold glare. 
"I only wish to show you," the Battlemaster said, and now 
his voice was very soft in the reborn silence, "what the price 
of such a victory must be. You will see and hear what future 
lies ahead of us from the lips and mind of this human scientist, 
who enjoyed the highest reputation in his own Galactic Milieu. 
His survey of our relationship with humanity and the attendant 
stresses was commissioned by the Thagdal himself in the hope 
of confuting my own long-stated opposition to human assim-ilation. 
This scientist carried out his analysis freely, without 
prejudice. Many of you were interviewed by him or by his 
associate, our late Creative Brother Ogmol." 
Now Nodonn held high the book-plaque that had been Bryan's 
love-gift to Mercy. 
"Here is a copy of the survey he recently completed. He 
will explain it to you himself. He wore no golden torc while 
he worked—and he wears one tonight only so that you may 
examine his mind yourselves and see the truth of his statements. 
Because I compel him through the torc, he will carry out the 
survey's extrapolations in full, including the impact of hu-manity's 
use of the iron. Listen to what this man, Bryan Gren-fell, 
says. It will not take long. And then return to the White.Silver Plain for our night affray and 
think as you contend against the Firvulag! When dawn brings the final day of our Grand 
Combat, you may then choose which banner to follow until 
the end—that of your Battlemaster, or that of our true Foe." 
The marshgrass flats and the lotus beds of the Great Brackish 
Marsh were gone now, and mangrove jungles were the ibises 
and egrets and pelicans once nested were completely sub-merged. 
Only the highest islets still poked above the rising waters; here crazed animals fought one 
another in the dwindling 
space until they were drowned or pushed off to swim for their 
lives. The luckier of the refugees found sanctuary on the great dam of volcanic rubble; but it was 
necessary for them to keep 
climbing higher and higher up the clinkery slope as the water 
continued to rise. Once the summit had been attained, many 
of the animals were too weary and traumatized to go farther 
(and down the eastern flank of the dam it was all desert, any- way); and so they crouched there 
beneath the moon that lacked one day to fullness—the tusked water deer and the otters and 
the pygmy hippos and the aquatic hyraxes and the long-bodied 
felids and the rats and the turtles and the snakes and amphibians 
and a myriad other displaced creatures—not one showing 
aggression toward another, instincts of predators and prey alike 
dulled by the devastation of their world. 
The water rose higher. The weight of it thrust against the 
natural dam; water seeped into every crevice and percolated 
through the coarser strata of ash. Some found its way among 
the debris clogging the Long Fjord. When this reached the head 

of the narrow Southern Lagoon estuary, a thousand little jets 
of water squirted from the rubble-face. The water in the erstwhile Great Brackish Marsh was now 
more than eighty meters deep where once the flamingos had 
waded. For the first time in more than two million years it was 
possible for a fish to swim from the cliffs of southern Spain 
to the Morocco shore..9 
HE WAS SUMMONED AGAIN FROM THE WARM DARK. 
Why oh why couldn't they simply leave him in peace? Leave 
him to savor the last of her alone? He had done the sun-god's 
bidding, explaining to the barbarians why the shutting of the 
time-gate was good, why the Tanu should wean themselves 
from their overdependence upon human technology. 
Ingenious, the way that the Battlemaster had twisted the 
statistics to his own ends; but of course he had to spare Mercy 
and the loyal hybrids. Pogroms were so wasteful and Apollo 
ever a prudent husband-man. 
But Bryan had justified it all, speaking through his golden 
torc. Poor Oggy had been so right about it being a boon to 
communication. (And so it was, provided you had angelic 
backing when it came to sloughing over the dicey bits without 
getting caught.) When the little lecture was finished, the mood 
of the crowd was turning away from Aiken Drum. Bryan wasn't 
surprised. Barbarians were a hot-headed and fickle lot, and this 
tribe was almost as mercurial as the Irish. 
Nodonn had taken him then to the place where Mercy waited. 
And she had shown him what he had been missing by not 
accepting the golden torc before. Even knowing that it was the 
end, that he would not survive the cave this time, he had gone 
freely to her, into the bright flight and the long fall. 
Free but never free of you with your wild wild eyes, Mercy. 
And will I love you till I die. 
"Come out of it, son. Help a little. I'm not the best redactor 
in the realm, but there's a few tricks left in the old man's bag. 
Come on, Bryan. You remember me." 
I die I did but die I see her passing by I die...."He's not gonna stop free-wheeling until you 
zorch him in the stem, Craftsmaster." 
"You shut up, you damned male trollop. I pulled your mar-bles 
together, didn't I ?.. .Come on Bryan. Open your eyes, 
son." 
A great round irascible face, hair and trailing mustaches of 
silvery gold, all backlighted by a yellow morning sky with 
strange streaky red clouds. He closed his eyes, willing the 
memory of her and her warm dark to return. 
But it would not, not yet. In an unsteady voice, Bryan said, 
"Hullo, Lord Aluteyn." 
"That's good!" An arm slipped around him, lifting. A glass 
of water, not very cold, was held to his mouth. 
"I'd rather be left alone," Bryan whispered. Oh, let me go down, down! But where was that sea 
unreflecting of stars? "No you don't son. Not yet." 
He peered out of the mind-cave resentfully. A crowd of 
people, looking very seedy, crouched all around him. Gold 
and silver and gray torcs and now all of them able to feel at 
his mind in the most disconcerting way. "Do stop that, all of you," he told them peevishly. "It's 
not decent when—when I'm—" "You're not quite ready to shuffle off, son. I've patched you up a 
little, as well as I could. Just tell us what happened at that conclave last night. What's Aiken 
Drum up to? There's 
something very odd going on. Since I'm deposed, I've had 
a block put on my metafaculties to restrict my range to the immediate vicinity. But I don't need 
my powers to feel the ground tremors and the changes in the local earth currents, and see those 
anomalous clouds. Has your young friend Aiken 
Drum been doing any fancy mucking-about with Aven's ge-ology?" 

Now Bryan's eyes were fully open. He began to laugh, then 
trailed off in feeble coughing. The glass of water met his lips. 
"I should think... Aiken Drum had quite enough on his plate already... without conjuring up 
earthquakes." He sank back against the Craftsmaster's arm. A singular pang shot through 
him. What if he wasn't going to die? A contemptuous voice. Raimo? Yes, it was Raimo Hak- kinen, 
that poor devil. "He's no help! Maybe we can get some fresh dope when the next batch of losers is 
tossed in here at sunset. Though 
what difference it makes to us—"."I thought I was beyond caring," the Craftsmaster said. "But 
I do care! I'm one of the First Comers, and I care! If there is 
a genuine danger, then I must give warning. My honor demands 
it!" 
The Raimo Hakkinen voice was muttering something scorn-ful. 
Other voices, other thoughts, came sloshing in disorderly 
waves against Bryan's brain. A few persistent interlopers picked 
through the ruins like bored ghouls. 
"A really big earthquake might crack this thing so we could 
escape!" the Raimo voice said. Exclamations. Protests. And 
the probing. How many of them were there mauling him? 
"Mercy," he groaned aloud. 
Something like an arm of silver-and-green light swept all 
of the prying minds away from him and showed him how to 
put up the screen. He did. But when he turned to descend again 
he could not find the cave. His mind and voice howled, an-guished, 
"Mercy!" 
Run search cry hunt the dark with the golden torc's horrible 
light driving it back whenever he spotted it afar off. She would 
not wait. She was gone. And he might not die. 
"Mercy," he whispered again, and woke to the compas-sionate 
gaze of the old Craftsmaster. After a long time, he 
asked, "Where is this place? What is it?" 
"It's called," Aluteyn said, "the Great Retort." 
Brede Shipspouse led the three humans along the deserted 
corridor deep within the secret wing of Redact House. They 
were free of their gray torcs, dressed in fresh clothing, and at 
a loss to know who she was or what she wanted of them. 
"My identity is unimportant," said the masked exotic, 
stopping in front of a closed door. "The only one who matters 
lies within, lost now in a reverie of self but soon perhaps to 
awaken." 
Brede's brown eyes fixed on Basil. "You are a man of action 
and ingenuity. In a few brief hours your talents will be called 
on. When the time comes, you will know what to do. All of 
the things you will need—including maps and many sophis-ticated 
devices confiscated from time-travelers—will be found 
stored in lockers inside this room." 
The headdress of the Shipspouse tilted far back as she ad-dressed 
Chief Burke, and her eyes crinkled with humor at the 
big Native American's expression of suspicion. "You will or-ganize 
and lead the survivors. It will be difficult, for there will.be the Skin patients to care for, and 
even the able-bodied will 
be reluctant to follow a bareneck human. But you will lead 
them, nonetheless." Brede's hand now rested on the latch of the door. She said to Amerie, "Your 
task will be the most difficult of all, for you will have to help her during the terrible time of 
adjust-ment. 
But you were her friend—and you are the only one of 
the original group left for Elizabeth to turn to. You will understand her, even though you are not 
a metapsychic. She does not need a fellow initiate now. She needs a friend... and 
a confessor." 
The door opened. Within was a large dimly lit room, three of its walls carved from the living 
rock. The wall at the far end had a long horizontal slot, glassed over, that revealed a late 
afternoon panorama of Muriah and the salt flats to the 

south. There were storage lockers lining the side walls and in the center of the room, a low cot 
with a figure in red denim 
lying on it. 
"Remain here until tomorrow morning. Do not leave this 
place before dawn, no matter what should happen. You will 
not see me again, because I must go down to be with my people in the hour that I have foreseen. 
When Elizabeth wakes, tell 
her this: Now you are free to make a true choice. Guard her 
well, for she will soon be the most important person in the 
world." 
Brede faded from their sight, enigmatic to the last. The three of them exchanged glances and 
shrugs, and then Amerie 
went to examine Elizabeth while the men opened the lockers. 
With the Fifth Day now winding down to the final hours of the High Melee, both armies were 
inflamed and hopeful of 
victory, even though the Firvulag knew very well that the odds 
were lengthening against them. 
King Yeochee spent most of the afternoon in the darkened Tent of the Seers, where talented crones 
used farsensing powers 
to project choice bits of action for the noncombatant Little 
People to view. The duel between old Leyr and Imidol of the 
Host had been particularly gripping... and poignant, too, for 
Yeochee remembered well what a firebreather the old Lord 
Coercer had been before his banishment by Gomnol. Even 
though Leyr was one of the Foe, that had been a hard way for him to go—sliced up slowly like a 
salami and then forced, by.the superior metafaculty of the young coercer, to open his 
gorget and cut his own throat. Ah, well. Youth would have its 
day. 
He left the seers and rambled on to the field hospital where 
the wounded were being treated preparatory to disembarking for home. Boats had already begun to 
leave Aven, and many 
more would sail before the Combat had its official finale at 
dawn. The post-Combat Truce, like that prior to the games, was only one month in length—and 
overland travel with the wounded was a slow business, especially since they could not utilize 
river boats on their homeward journey. 
Yeochee wandered up and down the rows of battered and 
bloody gnomes. A word of cheer from the Old Man always 
seemed to bolster the warriors' spirits, and they needed all the 
help they could get. There was no magical healing Skin in the 
field hospital of the Little People. All they had were their rough 
and ready surgical skills, fortitude, and the superior resistance 
of a tough race that had matured in a natural environment 
fraught with hazard. Nearly half of the original Firvulag com-plement 
was now hors de combat. But the Foe, King Yeochee 
reminded the smirking casualties, had lost almost the entire 
2000 of their gray elite corps and most of the 1500 silvers— 
as well as a respectable number of the rash and punier-powered 
among the Tanu and human golds. "We still have a chance!" the King asserted. "We're not licked 
yet. This might just be the year that the Sword of Sharn 
comes home!" 
The broken warriors croaked and gargled and whistled. Yeo-chee 
hopped on top of an empty bandage crate, knocking his 
crown askew again. 
"So we haven't got as many high-point banners as they do! So we've only got four skulls in the 
'Most Exalted' class! 
Damme if two of 'em don't belong to the Host—and one of 
those a High Tabler! Velteyn and Riganone are worth ten extra 
points right there, and that offsets our loss of poor old Four-Fang 
and Nukalavee. We've still got the Heroic Encounters to 
come, and one good upset there could wipe out all the Foe's 
advantage in the Petty Nobility tally. If they do beat us, it'll 

be by a squeaker. But they won't beat us! We're going to fight, 
and we're going to win!" The tent rang with ragged cheers. One game soul even managed to turn on 
his sparkling centipede apparition for a 
moment..Wiping away a furtive tear, Yeochee stood proudly and let 
his regal aspect come slowly upon him. His dusty fur-trimmed 
robe turned to obsidian parade armor, blazing with a thousand 
gems. His tall crown (sitting foursquare) sprouted its ram's 
horns and beak of enameled gold, and brushed the roof of the 
great hospital tent as he attained his full stature, dark and 
terrible, eyes glowing like green beacons. 
"This is the end of my term in office, warriors. And I 
confess that I never dared hope to see the old days of glory 
restored before my retirement. But those days are at hand! 
Even if we fall a little short this time.. .just wait till NEXT 
year!" 
"Let's hear it for Yeochee!" somebody yelled. And the 
maimed and mangled hauled themselves up and hailed the 
Sovereign Lord of the Heights and Depths, the Monarch of 
the Infernal Infinite, the Undoubted Ruler of the Known World. 
Illusionary aspects flashed and flared and the tent seemed 
crowded with a thousand monsters. But then as quickly as they 
had appeared they were extinguished, and the little man in the 
dusty robe with the tilted crown was saying, "Te lift your 
fighting hearts, lasses and lads," and all the brave demons 
turned again to bloodstained and weary gnomes. 
Yeochee slipped outside into the evening calm of the Last 
Recess. He would still have to get something to eat and say 
his prayers and then get into harness to join Pallol and the 
generals overseeing the last of the Melee. In the four hours 
before midnight, the free-for-all battle would have its wild 
climax. Some of the Firvulag shitfires were sure to be bucking 
for the empty champion slots—and Yeochee wanted to be there 
on the spot with the commendation if any of them came through. 
No proxy accolading for him! 
The sky looked rather strange. Wispy cloud-tails coming 
out of the west still showed purplish against indigo. It was too 
early for the rains, though. The King shook his head. The big 
full moon was sullen orange in leftover dust and smoke blown 
out over the lagoon. Bearers with the newly wounded and the 
decapitated dead were wending their way from the battlefield, 
across the Well-of-the-Sea Canal, and past the great pile of 
skulls encircled by exultant bonfires. The heap of gilded tro-phies 
had never been larger. And how fine those captured 
banners would look hanging among the old soot-stained blazons 
draping the stalactites at High Vrazel! Perhaps they wouldn't.win back the lost Sword of Sharn. 
But they would at least have 
acquitted themselves with honor. 
"And that's the important thing!" Yeochee whispered fiercely. 
Out on the salt, the glow worn processions carried in their 
burdens..10 
AT MIDNIGHT ON THE WHITE SILVER PLAIN, WHEN THE SILVER 
moon rode high behind thin clouds that rippled like watered 
silk, the two armies lowered their weapons and finally disen-gaged. 
Bareneck hostlers led all the war-chalikos away. Swift 
psychokinetics cleared a great circle of bodies and debris. All 
around its perimeter the rank and file of Tanu and Firvulag 
gathered indiscriminantly in the fellowship of utter physical 
exhaustion. 
The Kings came forth with their entourage of noncomba-tants, 
Thagdal bearing the trophy Sword. And after them 
swarmed the commonalty from the camps who wished to view 

the Heroic Encounters with their own eyes. At the last, in an 
action so unprecedented that it defied comment, Brede came. 
No one needed to have the tallies posted; each mind knew 
what the Melee score was—the Tanu holding to their precar-ious 
noble bodycount lead, which would be overtaken if there 
were any significant upsets during the Encounters. The great 
champions of the sibling peoples would now fight individually; 
they were nearly equal in metapsychic as well as physical 
prowess. None of the Firvulag heroes were of the gnomish 
build; they were all massive and some of them were giants. 
The Tanu (with one exception) were also outstanding physical 
specimens, their somewhat lighter musculature outweighed by 
the wider range of their mental powers. So well matched were 
the Great Ones of the two battle-companies that the winners 
of the Encounters were almost always adjudged on points. It 
had been many years since any hero had been slain in the 
Combat's final scoring event. 
Referees from both races took their positions. Heralds 
sounded a fanfare of glass and silver and the Firvulag drums.began to beat. Out of the blackarmored 
multitude came Pallol 
One-Eye, bearing his terrible effigy battle standard, which he 
implanted in the salt. The nine Great Ones of the Little People 
emerged from the throngs of their adherents to declare fealty 
to their Battlemaster: Sharn-Mes, the veteran Medor, Galbor Redcap, the female heroes Ayfa and 
Skathe, Tetrol Bone-crusher, 
Betularn White-Hand, and—newly accoladed in place 
of the defunct Bles and Nukalavee—Fafnor Ice-Jaws and Kar-bree 
the Worm. 
While the cheers for the Firvulag champions still resounded, 
Nodonn came forward to plant his sun-faced blazon. Those 
who gathered beneath it were Imidol, Culluket the Interrogator, 
Kuhal Earthshaker, and Celadeyr of Afaliah, field-promoted 
to the High Table and now Second Creator, who had chosen 
to follow Nodonn after all. But then, with the crowd's murmur 
building to a new crescendo, Aiken Drum strolled out and 
planted his banner, and to him adhered Tagan Lord of Swords, 
Bunone Warteacher, Alberonn Mindeater, and Bleyn. 
The assembly erupted. This partisan division among the 
Tanu heroes signified that Nodonn's position as Battlemaster 
and heir apparent was challenged by the little gold-clad human. 
Tanu and Firvulag viewed such a split in leadership differently; 
among the Little People, there would have been a popular 
election to settle matters, just as in their choosing of kings; but 
the Tanu resolved their intramural conflict on the field of honor. 
The Heroic Encounters between Tanu and Firvulag might not 
be broken for partisan jousts, and so the total performance of 
each aspirant's attaches would decide whether Nodonn or Aiken 
Drum ultimately met Pallol. The ensuing Encounter of Battle-masters 
would bring to a close the scoring; and following would 
be the awarding of the victory trophy by Thagdal—who would 
either yield up the Sword to King Yeochee or keep it himself. 
This officially marked the end of Grand Combat hostilities. 
But not the end of the fighting—for the two rivals for the field 
leadership of the Tanu would then have their duel, the winner 
earning the option of declaring fealty to the reigning monarch or challenging him on the spot. 
The prospect of provoking the downfall of Tanu royalty 
gave a nice added incentive to the already victory-hungry Fir-vulag 
heroes and they began stamping their mailed feet on the salt in a gesture of defiance that was 
immediately taken up by 
all of the Little People among the spectators. The ground shook. 
The Tanu knights blazed in furious retaliatory display. The.aether and air vibrated with insults 

and it seemed that a riot might break out. 
Then from the crowded area where Thagdal and Yeochee 
stood, there stepped a woman dressed all in black and red with 
her face hidden. The chain of silence was held unmoving be-tween 
her outstretched hands. The mob fell back and the mind-storm 
calmed. 
The Marshal cried out: "Let the Encounters begin!" 
Now there was frantic whispering and a cudgeling of wits 
among the spectators, trying to compute the odds for this de-cisive 
event. Poor Karbree was bumped from the field because 
of the Aiken Drum-Nodonn combination, leaving eight sub-sidiary 
heroes on either side. As each Firvulag contestant stepped 
forward in order of reverse seniority, Thagdal—as present 
custodian of the victor's Sword—was entitled to name a Tanu opponent. It was a time of suspenseful 
calculation. Would the 
King succumb to the temptation to shave points in favor of 
Nodonn's boys? Would he risk the loss of the Sword in order to beat out the little human? Past 
matches between Nodonn 
and Pallol had been very close, pointwise. Was it possible that 
the small golden manikin had stronger metafaculties than the 
glorious Apollo? (Physically, there was no comparison.) And 
yet—the upstart must have something going for him or he 
wouldn't be in a position to challenge at all! Not since the Times of Unrest had there been such a 
wild windup to the 
Grand Combat; and a heretic aspiring to the Tanu throne was 
nothing compared to the prospect of a human King of the Many-Colored 
Land... 
Thagdal raised rainbow-glinting arms. 
"For Fafnor Ice-Jaws—Culluket the Interrogator!" (It fig-ured; 
the novice Firvulag versus a High Tabler notorious for 
his mind-tricks and dubious courage.) "For Betularn White-Hand— 
Celadeyr of Afaliah!" (Two codgers, but the edge clearly 
belonged to mean old Celo.) "For Tetrol Bonecrusher—Al-beronn 
Mindeater!" (Nod to the Firvulag. Was Thaggy getting 
sly in this match?) "For Galbor Redcap—Tagan Lord of 
Swords!" (Nope, guess not. Tagan had beaten this boy before.) 
"For Skathe—Bunone Warteacher!" (A tossup. Nothing harder 
to handicap than battling broads.) "For Ayfa—Bleyn!" (Now 
there was a real mismatch! Sham's wife would take that hybrid 
apart like fried chicken. This one could finish Aiken Drum.) 
"For Medor—Kuhal Earthshaker!" (Now the big guns. Pretty 
close, but this Tanu threw a helluva PK punch.) "And for Sharn-.Mes—Imidol Lord Coerced" 
(Anybody's fight, Imidol being so young. But coercers were a nasty lot and this boy was 
overdue.) "You will come forth," Thagdal said, "contend throughout the allotted time, and then 
withdraw promptly before the next contestants. And may the Goddess of Battles look upon you, 
judge your valor, and make her choice!" 
"Listen to me, Coercive Brother!" the Craftsmaster pleaded. "The ground tremors! The 
electromagnetic changes in the crust! Can't you feel them yourself?" The cherry-faced human gold 
in the blue armor shrugged. "With the fans making such a brouhaha over at the Encounters, I should 
bloody well hope the Earth would shake! It's two losses and two wins for Aiken Drum's folks now, 
and the lads of Nodonn have a win, a loss, and a tie between Kuhal and Medor. So you see we're 
down to the wire in this last tilt with Imidol versus Sharn-Mes—not only in the Battlemaster sweepstakes 
but very likely in the whole friggerty Combat to boot! And I'll thank you to stop impeding 
me in me duties so I can get back to the action!" Gray soldiers herded into the great glass 
enclosure the last of a draggled column of men and women, cleared from the dungeons and lockups of 
Muriah and brought to the White 
Silver Plain to make their last offering. There were not fallen 
nobility or craven fighters, but the saddest dregs of the realm— the traitors, the criminals 
beyond rehabilitation, the rebellious barenecks too feeble to provide sport in the Hunt, women 
worn out by childbearing, and above all the mind-burned, who shuf- fled along through the impetus 
of their gray or silver or gold necklets to stand in neat lines along the show-window front of the 

Great Retort and stare out at the moonlit battleground with empty eyes. 
"Read me!" shouted Aluteyn to the commander of the guard. 
"Check my mind! There's "something funny going on, I tell 
you! Just give me permission to farsense the King—or Lady Eadone Sciencemaster." 
"None of your guff now," warned the human coercer. "Just ease off, old fellah-me-lad. Cash in your 
chips like a man." 
He sent a mental order to the soldiers, turned his back, and hurried outside to where his mount 
waited. 
"I told you it wouldn't do any good," Raimo said gloomily. "But nice try, Al.".Aluteyn's teeth 
ground together as he looked out of the thick, clear front of the Retort. "Damn them! Damn them! 
This Med-iterranean 
Basin is unstable! Over to the east, between Kersic 
and that long archipelago that you future people call Italy, 
there's a zone of crustal instability I've had my eye on for a 
couple of hundred years. What if it has a major disturbance? 
There could be a seiche in the lagoon!" 
"What's a saysh?" asked mystified Raimo. 
"A tidal wave. A little one," said one of the craven gold 
knights, chuckling. "Wouldn't that be a kick in the nuts for all 
the brave gladiators on yon battlefield? Och, we know how the 
Tanu love to get their little trotters wet!" 
"The lagoon's too shallow to slosh up much," somebody 
opined. 
"It might make things too wet to light the fire under the 
Retort!" another shouted. 
"Not bloody likely. You ever see one o' these here confla-grayshuns, 
cockie? Ask old Al Tub-o-Guts Craftyfuckinmaster 
here! He usta be the one to touch off the corpse pile every 
year. Goddam psychoenergy from the whole goddam Guild o' 
Creators'll broil us in the goddam box even if it pours goddam 
pups and pussycats!" 
"I must give warning!" Aluteyn cried. "It's my duty! If I 
could only communicate—" 
"Send 'em a stargram C.O.D.," a harsh voice suggested. 
A woman said, "We could act out your message in charades 
when they come to light the bodies!" Her giggle was hysterical 
and infectious. Laughter spread. 
"Testify like those muffers Shadrach, Meshach, and Abed-nego! 
Too bad we got no Nomex angel in here like them old-time 
Israeli cats had!" 
The rabble of the doomed cackled and taunted and wept. 
Meanwhile, Aluteyn Craftsmaster, former Lord Creator, used 
what was left of his metapsychic power to etch a warning 
message on the inside of the Retort's smooth front pane. It 
probably wouldn't do any good, but he had to try something. 
"You lost!" 
"It was a lousy Firvulag trick he pulled on me, Battle-master," 
protested Imidol hotly. "I really had Sharn-Mes wor-ried, 
him and his damn scorpion suit, and if I'd just had three 
more seconds—"."You lost, and your bungling and inexperience may have 
cost us the Grand Combat!" 
The sapphire titan removed his helmet and dumped a bucket 
of cold water over his still-smoldering hair. "You know you 
can beat Aiken Drum in the one-on-one." 
"Fool!" The Battlemaster raged to incandescence. "Have 
you forgotten the Firvulag? They now lead us in the point-scoring!" 
In the minds of the eight Tanu champions and Nodonn hung 
the telltale scorecard: 
CULLUKET (LOST) vs. FAFNOR 
CELADEYR (WON) vs. BETULARN 
ALBERONN (WON) vs. TETROL 

TAGAN (WON) vs. GALBOR 
BUNONE (LOST) vs. SKATHE 
BLEYN (LOST) vs. AYFA 
KUHAL (TIED) vs. MEDOR 
IMIDOL (LOST) vs. SHARN-MES 
The Battlemaster gestured to the four allies of Aiken Drum 
who stood around the defeated coercer hero. "And thanks to our turncoat brothers and sister here, 
we must send a puny 
trickster into the Encounter against Pallol One-Eye!" There was a puff of purple smoke. "I thought 
I heard my 
name taken in vain," chirped Aiken Drum. "Don't tell me, Brother Sun-Face, that you have doubts 
about me being able 
to put a lid on the Big Eyeball?" 
Nodonn said, "He is five times more mighty than his blood-cousin, 
Delbaeth, who led us such a merry chase on the Quest. 
And he does not strike and run away, as the Shape of Fire did. He stands! Do you think that your 
mind will be able to shield 
you indefinitely from that Eye? Are you confident that your 
psychocreative power is a match for his? Or will you expend 
yourself in defense, human youth, using all of your strength 
to fend off his energies while he demolishes you with a single 
blow of his armored fist?" 
"How would you like me to kill him?" 
The eight champions and the Battlemaster broke into bitter laughter. Aiken frowned. "No. 
Seriously. I could kill him. Just like I did Delbaeth. I'd have to do it in a human way, and you 
and 
the rest of the High Table have to all agree that I can do it my.way without getting zapped by the 
lot of you for breaking some 
holy fewkin' rule." 
Nodonn's face within the fantastic rosy-gold helmet was 
bright with contempt. "You may not use the Spear on Pallol, 
Lowlife. Only against me." 
Aiken flipped one finger toward the Battlemaster. "That's 
not what I meant. And don't be impatient, Sun-Face. Your 
turn's coming!" He glared at the champions in turn. "Well? 
Am I going to pull your baked patoots out of the fire and win 
this damn shindy for you—or not? My trick's no more dirty 
than the ones the Firvulag and their human pals pulled on you 
guys at Finiah." And Aiken's mind showed them what he 
proposed to do. "Yes or no, dammit? Give the rest of the Table 
a holler or I'm gonna just take off like a skyrocket and leave 
you here with your thumbs in place." 
"Go and be damned!" Imidol yelled. "The Battlemaster will 
meet Pallol if you default. And he'll win!" 
"Are you sure?" inquired the jester softly. "Will he win by 
enough points to clinch the ball game? Nodonn can't decapitate 
Pallol. But I can. And you know what that'll do to our score. 
We win, walkin' away!" 
"I will confer with the High Table," said Nodonn. 
Fifteen seconds later he said, "You will fight Pallol One-Eye 
in your human way, without prejudice." 
The moon was descending now, having done its work. It 
still shed light on the Mediterranean Basin, but its tidal effects, 
so long inconsequential on the shallow water, were just begin-ning 
to make themselves felt in the area west of Aven where 
the dark waters lapped a crumbling lava crest..11 
AIKEN DRUM ADVANCED ON PALLOL ONE-EYE. 
The giant did not bother to shape-shift. He waited, an ebon 
monolith planted in the middle of the white-salt circle, and chuckled. The sound reminded some of 
the hushed spectators of a metal dustbin caroming down a long flight of stairs. 
Fools! What fools the Tanu were, sending this puny creature against him! They had forgotten, that 

was it. His long absence 
from the field had dimmed their memories, just as their fatal 
contact with Lowlife humankind had softened their wits. This insect, this gaudy midge in his 
golden glass and jaunty purple-feathered 
crest, was not even worth toying with. He would die in a single thunderclap thrust, incinerated by 
the incomparable 
blast of psychoenergy from Pallet's Eye!... 
Aiken Drum had come to a standstill. He had no lance, no amethyst sword, no weapon at all that 
Pallol could discern save a small golden ball and a dangling leather strap wide in the 
middle and thinning toward the ends. 
Holding up one admonishing forefinger in the universal gesture that begged a moment's wait, Aiken 
transferred the strap to his teeth and concentrated on trying to manipulate the 
ball in some way between his mailed fingers. Still laughing, 
Pallol removed his awesome helmet, tucked it under his right arm, and with the other hand raised 
the patch over his Eye. ZAP went the scarlet beam. It struck an invisible meta- psychic barrier, a 
three-meter dome covering Aiken, and dis-integrated 
into a web of lightnings. 
Aiken scowled, continuing his struggle with the ball. Was 
he trying to unscrew its halves? Press some button or lever countersunk in it? 
ZAPP!! This time, one portion of the psychokinetic screen 
glowed an ominous blue. The ogre bellowed in glee. "Now.we'll see how well you hide, you insolent 
little pismire!" 
A salvo of coherent radiation beams sprayed at Aiken's 
mental shield. Globs of energy like great static discharges hit 
the screen from all angles, making it glow blue, green, sickly 
yellow. The crowd of spectators emerged from their fascinated 
trance and began to shout. Tanu clanged their shields and tooted 
horns. Firvulag whooped and smote their tomtoms until the drumheads split. The great white-salt 
circle of the fighting-ground 
was walled by a mass of shining colored bodies and 
leaping nightmare shapes. 
At long last the two halves of Aiken Drum's golden ball 
fell apart. He grinned up at Pallol in a friendly fashion, paying 
no attention to the ferocious bombardment of the metapsychic 
screen. The barrier was fading from vermilion to dull lake red, 
the signal of imminent collapse. 
"There we go, Goliath baby! All set now!" 
Aiken placed a small silvery object in the wide section of the 
leathern strap and swung the sling around and around his head. 
Something flew through a hole in the screen, flickered among the 
light beams, and struck Pallol smack in his normal right eye. 
The Firvulag Battlemaster roared. Both gauntleted hands 
clutched at his face. The awful left Eye closed and from the right one spurted blood that was 
black in the pallid moonlight. The ogre's howl diminished in strength, and slowly, as a monumental 
structure folds and crumples when the charges of dem-olition 
engineers undermine its supporting members, the 
monstrous armored form bent, sagged, and crashed to the salt. 
Mayvar Kingmaker came out of the crowd with Aiken's 
own purple-glass sword and presented it to him. He cut off the 
head of Pallol with a single swipe and held it up. The once-potent 
Eye was shuttered. In the other socket something silvery 
glittered in a mass of bloody tissue. Delicately, Aiken plucked 
the fatal missile out. He zapped it with his creative faculty so 
that the late Lord Gomnol's cigar cutter was as shiny and clean 
as ever and the long vision of the farsensors in the crowd could 
read what was stamped on the metal: 
SOLINGEN—INOX STEEL 
"Here's to the new era," said Aiken Drum. "Long live Me." 
Six hundred kilometers to the southwest of Muriah, the long natural dam that stretched between 
Spain and Africa was finally 

starting to give way—not in one spot but in a hundred, all.along its waterlogged and crumbling 
length. Stressed unbear-ably 
by the weight of the ever-deepening water, great slices of 
the ash and scoria barrier went sliding forward down the eastern 
slope. As the impounded sea gushed over, the breaks grew and 
merged with one another until it seemed that the entire unstable 
dike would be shoved into the estuary of the Southern Lagoon 
by the pent-up pressure. 
Saltwater crashed among dark lava buttes in the desolate 
country east of the vanished Long Fjord. It flooded across 
moonlit flats, found new drainage channels among gypsum 
dunes and spindly towers of striped evaporite. The ground 
trembled and the air was filled with a stupendous roar as 
nearly 200 kilometers of dike-length subsided within fifteen 
minutes. 
The volume of rushing water was too vast for the narrow 
estuary of the Southern Lagoon to accommodate and the flood 
rose higher and higher in the phenomenon called hydraulic 
damming. Ahead of the catastrophic surge flew a hurricane 
blast of air. The pale waters of the long lagoon seemed to 
recede in horror before the onrushing dark wall, then surrender, 
rise to meet it, and merge at its nearly vertical face. The wave 
was 230 meters high. 
Freed of their last restraint, the waters of the Western Ocean 
raced toward the White Silver Plain. 
The throng of Tanu and humankind sang the Song while all 
of the knights held high their glowing jeweled swords. Beneath 
the waving white banner with its golden face stood Thagdal 
and Nontusvel, and behind them, seeming to generate her own 
shadow in spite of the multihued dazzle, was Brede. The Tanu 
Great Ones were also there; but of the Foe, only King Yeochee 
and the noncombatant Firvulag nobility stood waiting for the 
latest and most disappointing in a long-unbroken string of sim-ilar 
humiliations. The Firvulag champions, and many Little 
People among the spectators as well, had withdrawn—too 
overcome by sorrow even to stay for the rare spectacle that 
was soon to follow. 
Aiken Drum plucked Pallol's standard from the ground. 
With a psychocreative flourish he removed the demon-otter 
effigy that had been mounted amid the dyed scalp locks and 
dangling chains of skulls. Displaying the head of the fallen 
Battlemaster to the crowd one final time, Aiken made a ma-gician's 
pass. Pallol's head was transformed into a golden death.mask; in the socket of the left eye was a 
star ruby the size of a grapefruit. When the head was impaled upon its own battle 
standard, Aiken Drum raised it high and approached King 
Thagdal. 
Before he could speak, a gaunt figure in purple robes came from the ranks of Great Ones and stood 
beside him. 
The Marshal of Sport, already flustered by the outrageous-ness 
of the whole affair, seemed to choke on his stately an-nouncement. 
"Awful King—and Father! The referees and—and judges of the Tanu and Firvulag races have—conferred 
and made their 
last accounting. And—uh—the victory belongs to the noble and valorous Tanu battle-company of the 
Many-Colored Land!" After a pause for cheering, he resumed. "Here before you, 
craving your royal accolade as Premier Champion of this Grand Combat, stands Lord Aiken Drum—" 
"No," said Mayvar quietly. 
There was a breathless hush. 
"No longer Aiken Drum," she said, "for now I bestow upon him at last his Tanu name—that taken by 
every human admitted to our battle-company and fellowship. I have kept Aiken Drum's true name 
hidden in my heart for so long because I wished to let him show you himself that he is worthy of 
it. I, Mayvar Kingmaker, have never had doubts of him. And on this field 

of battle he has proved that he is truly one beloved of the 
Goddess.. .Therefore, with confidence and love I call him! 
He is the Shining One! He is the Young Lugonn." 
The crowd, stunned first by incredulity, began an uproarious clamor of voices and minds, horns and 
beaten shields. There were those who rejoiced and those who shouted enraged ex- ception; but the 
tumult was so vast that no one could say where the hearts of the majority lay—with the young 
Battlemaster or with the old. Thagdal stepped forward, his face stiff as that emblazoned on his 
royal banner. He accepted the Firvulag standard from the hands of the little golden man and passed 
it immediately to Bunone Warteacher. Eadone, Dean of Guilds, now came to the fore bearing 
something upon a long velvet pillow. The crowd noise ceased. This was the moment they had been 
wait- ing for. Would Aiken Drum—Lugonn—pick up the holy Sword of Sham and pass it in fealty to the 
Thagdal, as Nodonn always had done? Or would he— The shining small figure lifted the huge thing, 
leaving the.tethered powerpack on the pillow that Eadone still held. Taking 
the hilt in both hands, he pointed the Sword blade-down and 
drove it into the salt at the feet of the King, then turned his 
back on Thagdal. 
There was a slow letting-out of breath. The throng seemed 
stupefied, as did all of the royalty, both Tanu and Firvulag, 
gathered beneath the emblems of the two Kings. Into this void stepped the dark personage who had 
guided 
both races for a thousand years. Her garments of scarlet and 
black repeated the colors of the sky, for it was nearly dawn. 
Her face, clearly visible, was wet with tears. 
"Let it be, then," her mind and voice spoke together, "as I 
have foreseen. Let the two heroes contend with Sword and 
Spear on the White Silver Plain in the last Combat." 
Mayvar led out the four Tanu champions who had declared 
for the Shining One in the Heroic Encounters. They carried 
with them the Spear. Bleyn fastened the jeweled baldric holding 
the powerpack around the little human's shoulder and hip. 
Nodonn materialized out of thin air and stood next to the Sword. 
He pulled it from the ground and held it high while Kuhal, 
Imidol, Culluket, and Celadeyr girded him in the harness. 
The throng drew far back. Impelled by some psychokinetic 
force, the heroic pair separated, gliding a few centimeters above 
the salt, which now had assumed a dull-red luminescence in 
the overcast dawn. Visible haloes of defensive mental energy 
englobed the tall rosy-gold apparition and the diminutive form 
of the trickster. Both stood ready. 
"Begin," said the Shipspouse. There were twin bursts of emerald fire and simultaneous 
concussions that forced all of the torced spectators to shield 
their senses for an instant. When the audience recovered, the 
thunder still reverberated over the Plain. Both contestants stood 
firm, psychic barriers and glowing armor intact. 
Again came the green explosions and the monstrous clap of 
sound—but this time the echoes did not dwindle. The deep 
rumbling became louder and the ground shook under the heroes' 
feet. A wind rose out of nowhere, adding its howl to the deeper 
note. The red-and-black sky suddenly was obliterated all along 
the western horizon. 
Thagdal the King saw the wave and cried the first mental 
warning. Summoning every erg of his metapsychic power, he 
erected a wall "To me! To me, all of you!" 
They joined him—Firvulag and Tanu and torced human—.in a massed mind-thrust never before attempted 
in Exile. No-donn 
lent his psychokinetic strength, and Lugonn, and all of the Little People strove with their 
creativity to shore up the King's mental bastion that held back the onrushing sea, to 
prevent it from breaking over them all. But the dark water 
mounted higher, higher, and the weight of it pressing their 
defending minds was unimaginable millions of tons... The wave broke. 
"I am still King," Thagdal told Nontusvel. The sea crashed 

upon them. Drowning, he was content, and he sent the last of 
his dwindling force in a touch of comfort to the Queen, for he had not let go of her hand. 
The primary wave-front rushed on into the sunrise, losing 
height rapidly as it spread into the expanse of the Great Lagoon. 
A secondary surge washed the shoulder of the Aven Peninsula, 
flooding inland for several kilometers before draining away down the cliffs. The waters caught 
those still remaining in the 
city by surprise, and most of them perished, including all but a handful of the ramapithecine 
slaves. 
Amerie would have rushed out of the room high on the Mount of Heroes, except that Chief Burke 
seized her and held 
her tight, and she fought him and screamed until she was 
exhausted and could weep no longer. And then Basil came and 
crouched there with them under the terrible window. Both Amerie and the rugged old lawyer 
understood when the former don whispered his ancient prayer. 
"Elevaverunt flumina fluctus suos, a vocibus aquarum mul-tarum. 
Mirabilis elationes maris. Mirabilis in altis Dominus." 
Together, they waited for Elizabeth..12 
THE MIND-CRIES AS THEY PASSED! 
They reached Elizabeth even within the cocoon of fire. The first scattered leavetakings at the 
start of the Melee came like 
tentative drops introducing a storm; and then whole gusts of 
them went flying by in increasing numbers—crying out, afraid 
and disappointed and raging and eager. There were lulls. And 
then the death gales rising again, rushing past her refuge. All 
those disembodied minds hurrying beyond space and time to 
the many-in-All that she had shut out, and a very few spinning 
their own fiery cocoons to drift apart from the stream, denying, 
going their own lost way. But she was not free to follow the river of Mind. She was anchored yet 
to Earth. When the final disjunctive cataclysm 
happened, she felt the shock even within the hiding place, and 
had to let her mind's eye observe. Too amazed to grieve, she 
watched and heard the torrent passing. Many of them were persons she knew. And at the end of 
the great storm-surge of mortality there came one that was all 
too familiar. Brede's mind swept by her with a final appealing 
touch. And then Elizabeth saw an alien thing, vast and bright and loving, come to meet its mate, 
an escort into irresistible 
light... 
Elizabeth awoke. The face leaning over her belonged to Sister Amerie, and it had the drawn, 
haunted expression that comes after there are 
no tears left. 
"I know," said Elizabeth. 
The nun extended her hand, touched Elizabeth's tightly clenched fingers. "There was—an exotic 
woman. She knew 
this would happen. She healed us. Brought us here to you..And there was a message: 'Tell Elizabeth 
that now she is free 
to make a true choice.' I hope you understand." 
Elizabeth sat up. After a moment she was able to rise from 
the cot and walk to the window in the natural bunker where Basil and Chief Burke stood, now unable 
to take their eyes 
from the scene below the mountain. 
Morning had broken fully and the heavily clouded sky gave 
a gray and pitiful light. The White Silver Plain and both tent-cities 
and the entire expanse of carved and sparkling sediments 
that had once rimmed Muriah from its cliffs to the lagoon shores 
had vanished. In its place was a sea. It was the color of dull 
jade and its white-capped waves ran eastward toward the far 
horizon. Driven by the strong wind, breakers crashed over the 
small curving point of land at the peninsula's end where Brede's 
house had been. Muriah was now beyond reach of the waves; 
however, smashed houses and trees and pools of draining water 

showed where the earlier surge had devastated most of the 
capital city. 
Now you are free to make a true choice. 
Outside the door of their room was noise. Her mind per-ceived 
the anguished jumble of thoughts. It was hard—wellnigh 
impossible, given the unbearable emotional load of them— to distinguish Tanu from human, or 
these from the Firvulag who 
were apparently gathered among them. There were no masters 
and slaves, no friends or Foes; there were only survivors. 
"I think we should go out now," Chief Burke said. 
Elizabeth nodded. The four of them turned away from the 
window and walked to the door. Burke lifted the latch. Now you are free to make a true choice. 
There stood Dionket and Creyn and others wearing the garb 
of redactors. Behind them milled numbers of the survivors. 
Elizabeth gently fended their minds, met the eyes of the two 
healers. 
"Give me just a few minutes." She gestured to the red 
balloon jumpsuit she still wore. "I'd like to find some other 
clothes." 
Torn from its base, the huge glass box that was the Great 
Retort wallowed in the flood, the bodies inside of it tumbling 
and piling with each violent oscillation. Eventually the Retort 
settled on a fairly even keel. Half of its bulk was below the 
waterline and the conscious ones among the prisoners felt they 
were adrift in some bizarre parody of a glass-bottomed boat..The black and silver awning that had 
roofed it was all tattered and it snapped as the gale took hold of the ornamental super-structure. 
The benches and tables, the commodes and food 
dishes and water jars were all flung together with the bodies of the condemned. 
Raimo Hakkinen spat out saltwater, salt blood, and a tooth. 
He lay up against the front wall, close to the door. Water was 
leaking in through crevices around the jamb. 
"Come on," he croaked, stripping off his undershirt and 
ripping strips from it with his teeth. 
Only one person from the pile of casualties nearest him 
responded, a woman dressed in a suit of armor-padding. They 
bit and tore apart her short gambeson; the collapsed plass bub- bles made excellent caulking. 
"That ought to hold her," Raimo said, offering a gap-toothed 
smile. 
"She floats!" The woman stared in a dazed fashion at the 
brownish water, swirling with unimaginable debris, that sur- rounded them outside the four 
transparent walls. "Just like some 
crazy aquarium—except—those things on the outside aren't 
fish—" She turned away and was violently sick. Raimo backed 
off on hands and knees. 
"Maybe I can find a water jar that didn't break." 
He went creeping among the bodies and the mess. Quite a 
few people were alive, but there were plenty of deaders, too. 
He located a container of water snuggled amid three corpses. 
And wasn't that one over there— 
He turned the body over. "Bryan? You all right?" The lips 
smiled. "Bryan?" 
"He cannot hear you," said the voice of Aluteyn Crafts-master. 
"Your friend has passed into Tana's peace." 
Raimo shrank back, holding the water bottle. "Uh—too 
bad. We came down to Muriah on the same boat together. And 
if the rumors I heard about him and Lady Rosmar were true, 
maybe the two of us—well, sorta suffered the same way." 
Aluteyn gently unfastened Bryan's golden torc. "Not quite 
the same way, Raimo. But neither of you has to suffer any 
more." He put the torc around Raimo's neck, removing the 
silver one he had been wearing. "I think Bryan would have 

wanted you to have this. Your brain is mending, thanks to my 
little patch job, and we may find more skilled redactors among 
our fellow survivors. Or—later."."You think we'll make it? You think this damn glass box'll 
float long enough to take us to shore?" 
"Those who programmed restraints on my metafunctions 
are doing so no more. I can generate a moderate PK wind, 
even keep out the sea by reinforcing the walls of the Retort, 
now that I have recovered my full consciousness." He gestured 
to the sprawled bodies. "If you will help me to sort out the 
ones who still live—" 
"Let me go get the dame who was helping me to caulk the 
door." Raimo grinned and tottered off. The floor of the Retort 
lurched in the fierce currents, setting the bodies to rolling. 
The Craftsmaster gave one last look at the smiling face of 
the dead anthropologist. Then, groaning with pain and resig-nation, 
he began to work again. 
She was a strong swimmer and a woman of courage. Using 
her fatigued creativity, she could still fashion twin bubbles from 
a portion of her court dress and position them behind her arms 
so they would help to buoy her up. And when the sun came 
out at last to shine on the swirling muddy waters and she began to faint from weariness and shock, 
Mercy called out: 
"My Lord! Where are you, Nodonn?" 
No answering thought came. It was hard, almost impossible, 
to muster the control needed for long-range farspeaking. She 
was so deadly tired! But finally she gathered the strength and 
called again. "Nodonn! Nodonn!" 
O come daemon lover, angel of light, come. How can you 
be dead and I not? 
She floated in the midst of the flood. Faint thoughts, faraway 
and garbled, made a vertiginous twitter in her brain. None of 
them were his thoughts. 
"Nodonn," she kept whispering. And once, "Bryan." 
Her head flung back, hair trailing like tendrils of dark sea-weed, 
Mercy drifted in the sea. Finally the sun went down and 
it was cold. Her legs and lower body numbed. She suffered 
from thirst, but she was so weakened from shock that she could 
separate the sweet water molecules from the salt with only the 
greatest effort. Creativity, of all the metafunctions, is most 
vulnerable to trauma and sorrow. 
"Then I will die along with his world," she decided, "for it's all gone now, all the brightness 
and the wonder and the 
song." 
A small yellow light..It bobbed, flickered, grew. She decided to wait, since the radiant entity 
gave evidence of having farseen her, even though 
it stayed coyly beyond her own mental sight. After an hour or 
so the glowing thing drew close by. She saw it was the Krai— 
that great golden cauldron sacred to the Creator Guild—and 
she cried out. "Creative Brother! Do you know if Nodonn lives?" 
"Is that gratitude?" asked Aiken Drum. 
He leaned over the rim of the kettle, extended an arm all 
covered in golden pockets, and painfully lifted her up. She was 
deposited in a heap on the curved metal beside him and he 
grinned down at her. 
"Sorry to be so crude on the teleport, Merce lovie, but I'm 
feeling a little wonky myself yet. Lie still and I'll see if I can 
conjure you dry." 
"You," she said. "You live." 
"The baddest penny of them all. When I saw that we didn't 
stand a chance with our King Canute act, I figured every man 
for himself and spun myself a little air capsule. Popped up and 

only had enough strength left to float. This tub was a mighty welcome sight, I can tell you. I'd 
just about had it when it 
came sailing by, chirky as you please." 
Slowly he dried her, cleansed her of salt and filth, clumsily 
restored her torn clothing. By the time he finished she was 
nearly asleep. "The gown," she murmured, "is supposed to be rose-col- ored—not gold and black." 
"I like gold and black better." 
She tried to rouse herself. Her whisper retained a trace of the old coquetry. "Now then... what's 
in that naughty mind of yours, Lord Lugonn Aiken Drum?" 
"Go to sleep, little Lady of Goriah, little creative Mercy- Rosmar. There's plenty of time to talk 
about that tomorrow." 
Winter rains swept over the Bordeaux marshes. The great river was silty, and the fish were shy, 
but there were still plenty of wildfowl and the small anterless deer with the tusks, and in higher 
parts of the large island where the oaks and chestnuts 
grew, succulent mushrooms. Sukey craved them now and had nagged Stein until he agreed to go for a 
basketful. And then she was sorry when it began to rain so hard, and saw to it that 
there was a fine hot stew waiting for him and a good fire in 
the cabin hearth..He returned when it was nearly dark. Besides the mush-rooms, 
there was a haunch from a half-grown wild porker. He 
said, "The rest is cached up a tree. I can fetch it tomorrow. 
Cook this pig meat well, remember." 
"I will, Stein. I wouldn't take a chance. You know that." 
She caught up one of the wet, callused hands and kissed it. 
"Thank you for the mushrooms." 
"I'm all soaked," he admonished her. "Wait." He stripped 
off the squelchy buckskin jacket and pants and the rawhide 
moccasins and warmed himself at the fire while she leaned 
against him, watching the flames and smiling secretly. In the 
summer it would be born, and there would be plenty of time 
to search for other humans then, in the days of lasting calm 
weather when the great balloon would sail very slowly and 
land with scarcely a jolt. Next August or September, they would 
leave. And in the meantime, this wasn't so bad. They were all 
alone, completely safe, with plenty of food and a snug cabin 
and each other. 
"Eat now," she told him. "I'll take care of your things and 
see to this meat." 
Just before they were ready to go to bed the rain stopped. 
Stein lifted the door flap and stepped outside, and when she 
heard him returning she came to stand beside him in the peace-ful, 
dripping dark. The stars were out. 
"I love it here," she said. "I love you. Oh, Stein." 
He encircled her with one great arm, saying nothing, only 
looking up into the sky. Why should they leave this place? 
They had often talked of it, but why was it necessary to seek 
out other humans? Who knew what they would be like? Be-sides, 
there were wild Firvulag in the mainland wilderness. He 
knew, for he had seen their will-o'-the-wisp dancing lights once 
when he had gone exploring in the dinghy. 
The two of them had been very lucky in avoiding contact 
with exotics on their way to this haven. It would be madness 
to run the risk all over again, doubly mad to take a newborn 
infant on a journey in the balloon. A balloon was too un-predictable. 
It flew its own way, not yours. If an unexpected 
strong wind took them, they might be carried hundreds of 
kilometers before being able to descend safely. They could 
be carried southeast, all across France, over the Mediterra-nean 
... 
Never. He would never return there to look on what he had 
done. He would never do it.."Oh, look!" Sukey cried. "A shooting star! Or—is it? It's 
moving too slowly. Too late, it's gone behind a cloud! And I 

forgot to make a wish." 
He took her hand and led her back inside their little home. 
"Don't worry. I made the wish for you," he said. 
The lights on the orbiting flyer's display were all dead now, 
and the exotic alarms no longer sounded a warning. Without 
power, without oxygen, the craft faithfully maintained its park-ing 
orbit, going around and around the world at an altitude of 
something less than 50,000 kilometers. 
During most of its orbit, the dull-black surface of the flyer 
made it virtually invisible against the backdrop of space. But 
now and then sunlight would strike the flight deck's front port, brightening Richard's face and 
causing a brief beam to reflect back to Earth. Around and around the little broken bird went, 
endlessly circling. 
In the Hall of the Mountain King at High Vrazel, the de- cimated council of the Firvulag met to 
discuss new business: 
the election of a new Sovereign Lord of the Heights and Depths, 
Monarch of the Infernal Infinite, Father of All Firvulag, and 
Undoubted Ruler of All the Known World. 
"We're going to be in trouble this time," Sharn-Mes warned them. "How so?" queried Ayfa. 
He told her and the others the bad news. "The Howlers are demanding the franchise." 
The great black raven spiraled downward to the place where 
its fellows were feeding. All along the North African shore, 
the scavenger birds were prospering as never before. The bounty 
had persisted for nearly four months now and still showed no 
sign of scarcity. Pruuk! grated the newcomer. It ruffled its feathers malig- nantly when another 
bird was slow to move aside on the carcass 
of a porpoise. Pruuuuuuuk! it repeated, lifting its shoulders 
and opening its wings. It was a huge bird, half again as large as the others, and its eye sparkled 
with a mad gleam. Uneasily, the rest of the flock moved back from the meal, leaving the great 
stranger to dine in solitude. 
* * *."They're coming! They're coming!" Calistro the goat-boy 
shouted as he dashed up the length of Hidden Springs Canyon, 
his charges forgotten. "Sister Amerie and the Chief and a lot 
of others!" 
People swarmed from the cottages and huts, calling out to one another in excitement. A long train 
of riders was wending 
its way into the village outskirts. 
Old Man Kawai heard the commotion and stuck his head 
from the door of Madame Guderian's rose-covered house be-neath 
the pines. He sucked air through his teeth. 
"She comes!" 
A small cat came running from the box under the table, 
nearly tripping him when he spun about to snatch up a paring 
knife. "I must cut flowers and hurry to greet her!" He pointed 
a stern finger at the cat. "And you—see that your kittens are 
groomed so that you do not disgrace both of us!" 
The gauze-screened door slammed. Muttering to himself, 
the old man chopped off an armful of the heavy June rose 
clusters, then rushed down the path scattering pink and scarlet 
petals behind him. 
THE END OF PART THREE.REMEMBERING THE INCIDENT OF HIS CHILDHOOD, THE YOUNG male ramapithecine came 
again to the Lake of Giant Birds. 
There was a trail that some larger creatures had made more than a year ago, now kept open by other 
animals, for it had been a dry summer and the crater lake a boon to the thirsty. 
The ramapithecus was not in search of water, however. 
Slowly he crept out into the open area along the crater rim. 
There was the bird! When he crouched under it, he wondered why it seemed smaller. And the hole in 
its belly was gone, 
along with the climbing-up thing. But this was his bird. He 
knew. The memory burned within him. His mother screaming 
her anger... snatching, flinging away a precious joy that gleamed 

the color of the sun. He searched. Into a bush. That bush, that gorse bush. He extended a brownhaired 
arm into the spiny thicket. Careful. 
Scratch at the dusty soil. Dig, probe. 
His hand touched something smooth and hard. He drew it 
out with great care. It was as he remembered. The knobs snapped open, the halves turned, and this 
time it fitted around his neck 
snugly enough so that it could not be slipped off over his head. 
It would not be taken away from him again. He got up and started down the path to the forest where 
his 
mate, more timid, was waiting for him. The sunshine was brighter, the smell of the maquis more 
pungent, the trilling of 
birds and insects more distinct. All of the things around him 
were transformed. It excited and pleasured and scared him a little, all at the same time. I'm 
coming! Yes, I am!.He leaped in his joy and the lesser creatures on the trail 
hastened to get out of his way. 
THE END OF THE GOLDEN TORC 
Volume III of the Saga of Pliocene Exile, titled THE NONBORN KING, tells of a realignment of power 
structures during a turbulent period in the Many-Colored 
Land, wherein human and exotic antagonists 
receive their first intimations of a new-old menace 
from the western morning..Apologia Pro Geologia Sua 
Map of Northwestern Europe 
During the Pliocene Epoch 
Map of Western Mediterranean 
Region During the Pliocene Epoch 
Map of Eastern Aven (Balaeric Peninsula) 
During the Pliocene Epoch.APOLOGIA PRO 
GEOLOGIA SUA 
THE ANCIENT LANDSCAPE DEPICTED IN THIS SAGA REPRESENTS 
Europe during the so-called Mio-Pliocene Regression, when 
the Mediterranean was at its lowest ebb prior to the opening 
of the Straits of Gibraltar. The timing of the latter event has 
not been firmly established, but it may have taken place about 
5.5 million years before the present, and I have rounded off 
this figure to 6 million years. During the Miocene Epoch, the 
Mediterranean Basin received Atlantic waters via two channels 
that opened and closed a number of times—the Betic Channel 
in southern Spain and the Rif Channel, which extended across 
northern Morocco, Algeria, and Tunisia. The rupture at Gi-braltar 
took place after the Rif and Betic channels had closed. 
With the opening of the Gibraltar Gate, the filling of the Med-iterranean 
might have been a fairly rapid thing; perhaps only 
a hundred years after the cataclysm, influx from the Atlantic 
would have filled the basin of the Empty Sea completely, 
drowning the ancient Valley of the Rhone almost as far north 
as Lyon, and undoubtedly initiating tectonic adjustments that 
not only altered the Mediterranean floor into its present topog-raphy 
of abysses and shallows but also caused profound mod-.ification of the geology of the Italian 
peninsula, Sicily, and other unstable regions.* 
The map of the Empty Sea that I have drawn is entirely speculative, especially in its treatment of 
the Southern Lagoon 
Estuary, the Great Brackish Marsh, and regions now known as the Alboran Sea and the Algerian 
Basin. There are, however, 
volcanic remnants that make my rubble dam at least remotely plausible; vis. at Cabo de Gata; at 
Cap de Trois Fourches, 
Morocco; and of course at Isla de Alboran itself. 
I have postulated that Pontian flora and fauna were contem- poraneous with the Mediterranean 
flood. The climate, geog-raphy, 
vegetation, and animal life of Pontian times are essentially 
as set forth in the novel—but geologists and paleobiologists 
will be quick to detect a few fudgings that I hope can be forgiven 

in the spirit of good fun. Ramapithecus, that enigmatic and 
fascinating hominid of many aliases, is placed as late as the 
Pontian by virtue of a jaw described in 1972 by G. H. R. von 
Koenigswald, to which he gave the name Graecopithecus frey-bergi. 
The structure called the Ries (or Rieskessel) is the subject 
of some controversy—one school of thought accepting it as 
an astrobleme, while another holds it to be the result of a 
cryptovolcanic explosion that brought to the surface "meteo-ritelike" 
materials. Arguments for the latter viewpoint are sum-marized 
in G. H. J. McCall, Meteorites and Their Origins 
(New York: Wiley, 1973). The more dramatic impact hypoth-esis 
is elegantly supported in E. Preuss, "Das Ries und die 
Meteoriten-Theorie" (Stuttgart:Fortschritte der Mineralogie, 
*The only other events remotely comparable to the flooding of the Mediterranean 
were the "Great Missoula Roods," which took place during the Pleistocene Ice Age 
in western North America. Melt waters from the Cordilleran Glacier of the Rocky 
Mountains flowed toward the west until they met a lobe of the Okanogan Glacier. 
which blocked Clark Fork Valley near the present Lake Pend Oreille in northern 
Idaho. This formed Glacial Lake Missoula, one of the largest freshwater bodies ever 
to collect in the western part of the continent. More than a thousand feet deep in 
some places, it inundated the valleys of western Montana until the natural dam of 
ice and rubble broke. Some 500 cubic miles of water drained from the lake through 
the Grand Coulee within a period of about two weeks, scouring the Washington 
landscape known as the Channeled Scablands and draining into the Pacific through 
the Columbia Gorge. Hydraulic damming in the gorge piled the flood waters some 
400 feet above sea level in the region adjacent to Portland, Oregon. The flooding 
was apparently repeated a number of times. In comparing the Missoula Roods to the 
filling of the Mediterranean, one should recall that the Mediterranean Basin now 
holds about one million cubic miles of water; but in early Pliocene times, the basin 
is presumed to have been much shallower..1964, 41:271-312). McCall seems not to have considered 
the 
Preuss material in his later survey. In my novel, trajectory, 
velocity, and mass data are from Preuss. Both K/Ar and fission-track 
testing of the Moldavite tektites (usually considered of 
identical age with the Ries) yield—alas!—an approximate age of 14.7 ±0.7 million years..... 

